
==== Front
J Biol Chem
J Biol Chem
The Journal of Biological Chemistry
0021-9258
1083-351X
American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

S0021-9258(24)01848-9
10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107347
107347
JBC Reviews
Extracellular proteolysis in cancer: Proteases, substrates, and mechanisms in tumor progression and metastasis
Radisky Evette S. radisky.evette@mayo.edu
∗
Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center, Jacksonville, Florida, USA
∗ For correspondence: Evette S. Radisky radisky.evette@mayo.edu
06 5 2024
6 2024
06 5 2024
300 6 1073479 2 2024
8 4 2024
© 2024 The Authors
2024
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
A vast ensemble of extracellular proteins influences the development and progression of cancer, shaped and reshaped by a complex network of extracellular proteases. These proteases, belonging to the distinct classes of metalloproteases, serine proteases, cysteine proteases, and aspartic proteases, play a critical role in cancer. They often become dysregulated in cancer, with increases in pathological protease activity frequently driven by the loss of normal latency controls, diminished regulation by endogenous protease inhibitors, and changes in localization. Dysregulated proteases accelerate tumor progression and metastasis by degrading protein barriers within the extracellular matrix (ECM), stimulating tumor growth, reactivating dormant tumor cells, facilitating tumor cell escape from immune surveillance, and shifting stromal cells toward cancer-promoting behaviors through the precise proteolysis of specific substrates to alter their functions. These crucial substrates include ECM proteins and proteoglycans, soluble proteins secreted by tumor and stromal cells, and extracellular domains of cell surface proteins, including membrane receptors and adhesion proteins. The complexity of the extracellular protease web presents a significant challenge to untangle. Nevertheless, technological strides in proteomics, chemical biology, and the development of new probes and reagents are enabling progress and advancing our understanding of the pivotal importance of extracellular proteolysis in cancer.

Keywords

proteolysis
protease
serine protease
metalloprotease
cysteine protease
aspartic protease
cathepsin
zymogen
protein protease inhibitor
extracellular matrix
tumor microenvironment
proteolytic signaling
cancer progression
metastasis
degradomics
Abbreviations

ABPP activity-based protein profiling

ADAM a disintegrin and metalloprotease

ADAMTS a disintegrin and metalloprotease with thrombospondin motifs

APLP2 amyloid precursor-like protein 2

APP amyloid precursor protein

CAFs cancer-associated fibroblasts

CDCP1 CUB domain-containing protein 1

COFRADIC combined fractional diagonal chromatography

DPP IV dipeptidyl peptidase IV

ECM extracellular matrix

EGF epidermal growth factor

FAP fibroblast activation protein

FGF-2 Fibroblast growth factor 2

GAG glycosaminoglycans

HAI hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor

HB-EGF heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor

HGF Hepatocyte growth factor

HGFA hepatocyte growth factor activator

IL-8 interleukin-8

JAM junctional adhesion molecule

KLK kallikrein-related peptidase

LAP latency-associated peptide

LTBP latent TGFβ binding protein

MMP Matrix metalloproteinase

MSP macrophage-stimulating protein

NET neutrophil extracellular trap

PAI-1 plasminogen activator inhibitor-1

PDGF platelet-derived growth factor

PAR protease-activated receptor

RANKL Receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa B ligand

SUSPECS surface-spanning protein enrichment with click sugars

TAILS terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates

TFPI tissue factor pathway inhibitor

TGF-α transforming growth factor α

TGF- β transforming growth factor-β

TIMP tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases

tPA tissue-type plasminogen activator

TTSP type II transmembrane serine protease

uPA urokinase-type plasminogen activator

VEGF vascular endothelial growth factor

Reviewed by members of the JBC Editorial Board. Edited by George DeMartino
==== Body
pmcProteins are highly chemically stable—uncatalyzed hydrolysis of peptide bonds at neutral pH and ambient temperature takes hundreds of years (1). Because the human body is comprised largely of proteins, there is a requirement for efficient proteolysis to dynamically remodel and regulate the proteome to meet ongoing biological needs, to recycle spent proteins into useful building blocks, and to digest protein nutrients. Furthermore, proteomic analyses have revealed that many human proteins undergo proteolytic cleavage to reach their mature forms, making limited proteolysis one of the most prevalent posttranslational modifications (2). Proteases (also known as peptidases or proteinases) are the enzymes that catalyze peptide bond hydrolysis and constitute more than 3% of human protein-encoding genes (2). These highly proficient enzymes can cleave dozens, hundreds, or even thousands of peptide bonds per second, accelerating peptide bond hydrolysis by 10 to 13 orders of magnitude over uncatalyzed rates (1). While essential for normal physiological function, dysregulation of these powerful enzymes has the potential to wreak biological havoc, and indeed proteases also play pathological roles in many diseases, including cancer.

In the extracellular environment of tumors, the interplay of proteases, substrates, and effectors shapes biological and pathological processes crucial to cancer development. This tumor microenvironment includes tumor cells, immune cells, fibroblasts, vascular cells, and adipocytes, all of which communicate through a variety of secreted proteins and direct protein–protein interactions mediated by transmembrane and membrane-associated proteins and protein complexes. These cells are additionally influenced by their interactions with the extracellular matrix (ECM), whose architecture, composition, and stiffness are determined by ECM proteins, glycoproteins, and proteoglycans. Proteases are leading actors on this extracellular stage—by processing secreted, membrane-associated, and ECM proteins, proteases actively remodel the composition of the extracellular proteome. This remodeling involves releasing, activating, and inactivating bioactive proteins and peptides, modulating cell surface receptors and adhesion molecules, and altering the chemical and biophysical nature of the ECM. Not all such actions of proteases in the tumor microenvironment promote disease progression; some extracellular proteases play a role in tumor suppression, while others exhibit both pro- and anti-cancer effects depending on cancer type, stage, site of expression, and the model studied (3, 4). Additionally, a different set of proteases influences cancer development, progression, and response to therapy from inside the cell, impacting intracellular processes including apoptosis (5), gene transcription (6, 7), DNA repair (8, 9), and cellular metabolism (10, 11). Interestingly, some classically extracellular proteases also affect cancer through dual extra- and intracellular localization and hydrolysis of intracellular substrates (12).

The focus of this review is on the extracellular tumor-promoting actions of proteases, encompassing major players, their structures and catalytic mechanisms, their posttranslational regulation and dysregulation in cancer, and the mechanisms through which proteolysis of specific extracellular substrates contributes to tumor growth, progression, and metastasis. Additional topics include current and emerging technologies that are enhancing our ability to link specific proteases to specific substrate cleavage events and to understand the pathological consequences. The emerging picture is complex, involving myriad interconnected proteases, substrates, regulators, and effectors, the continued deciphering of which may lead to effective therapeutic strategies targeting proteases and proteolytic pathways.

Cancer-promoting extracellular proteases: an ensemble cast of characters

Human extracellular proteases are categorized into four classes based on their chemical mechanisms of catalysis: metalloproteases, serine proteases, cysteine proteases, and aspartic proteases. These classes further branch into evolutionary families. In the following sections, proteases are identified by class and family as annotated within the Merops Peptidase Database (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/merops/). Extracellular proteases from all four classes play roles in cancer progression (Table 1), sharing common functions and regulatory patterns across classes and families. A notable similarity is their pattern of recognizing substrate cleavage sites. The substrate peptide chain binds almost universally in an extended β-strand conformation (13), within a catalytic cleft of the enzyme containing the active site. The substrate amino acid residues upstream of the cleavage site are designated P1, P2, P3, etc. toward the protein N-terminus, and downstream of the cleavage site are designated P1ʹ, P2ʹ, P3ʹ, etc. towards the protein C-terminus. These residues dock into complementary binding pockets on the enzyme called subsites, correspondingly designated S1, S2, S3, etc. for the upstream (non-primed) subsites and S1ʹ, S2ʹ, S3ʹ, etc. for the downstream (primed) subsites (14). While specific subsites vary in importance between different protease classes and families, general patterns of recognition remain consistent. The substrate positioning for cleavage involves backbone-to-backbone hydrogen bonds between the substrate and fixed structural elements of the enzyme (the polypeptide binding site), often forming an antiparallel β-sheet pattern of hydrogen bonds within the active site cleft (15). Additionally, proteases across classes recognize specific protein substrates using exosites and auxiliary binding domains, which interact with substrate features further distant from the cleavage site (16, 17). This overview of protease classes and their substrate recognition sets the stage for a more focused examination of specific protease families, beginning with the pivotal role of metalloproteases in cancer progression.Table 1 Selected extracellular proteases with roles in tumor progression and metastasis

Class	MEROPS family	Proteasea	Alternative names	Selected cancer-relevant extracellular substratesa	
Metalloproteases	M10	MMP-1	collagenase 1	collagens I, II, III; proTGF-α; proHB-EGF; pro-amphiregulin; PAR1	
MMP-2	gelatinase A	collagens I, IV; fibronectin; elastin; laminin-332; TGFβ LAP; cystatin C	
MMP-3	stromelysin 1	collagens III, IV; laminin; fibronectin; elastin; proteoglycans; VEGF; E-cadherin; proMMP-9; proMMP-1	
MMP-7	matrilysin	collagen IV; elastin; laminin; fibronectin; proteoglycans; VEGF; proHB-EGF; RANKL; E-cadherin	
MMP-9	gelatinase B	collagen IV; fibronectin; elastin; laminin-111; TGFβ LAP; VEGF; IL-8; E-cadherin	
MMP-10	stromelysin 2	collagen III, IV; laminin; fibronectin; proteoglycans; proMMP-1	
MT1-MMP	MMP-14	collagens I, II, III, IV; laminin-332; fibronectin; proteoglycans; thrombospondin-1; TGFβ LAP; LTBP-1; RANKL; EphA2; proMMP-2	
MT2-MMP	MMP-15	collagen IV; proMMP-2	
MT3-MMP	MMP-16	collagens I, II, III, IV	
M12	ADAM-10	alpha-secretase	pro-EGF; RANKL; E-cadherin	
ADAM-15		proHB-EGF; pro-amphiregulin; E-cadherin	
ADAM-17	TACE	proTGF-α; pro-HB-EGF; pro-amphiregulin; desmoglein-2	
ADAMTS-1		aggrecan; versican; proTGF-α; proHB-EGF; pro-amphiregulin	
ADAMTS-4	aggrecanase 1	brevican; aggrecan; versican; biglycan	
ADAMTS-5	aggrecanase 2	brevican; aggrecan; versican; biglycan	


	
Serine proteases	S1	uPA		plasminogen; PDGF-C; PDGF-D; CDCP1; proKLKs	
tPA		plasminogen; PDGF-C	
plasmin		laminin; fibronectin; proteoglycans; LAP; VEGF; IL-8; PAR-4; CDCP1; pro-MMP-1; proMMP-3; pro-uPA; pro-elastase; proKLKs	
thrombin		fibrinogen; IL-8; FGF-2; PAR1; PAR3; PAR4; proKLKs	
trypsin 1	cationic trypsin	fibronectin; laminin; PAR2; pro-uPA	
trypsin 2	anionic trypsin	collagen 1; fibronectin; laminin; PAR2; pro-uPA; proMMP-1, -2, -3, -9, -13, proMT1-MMP; TIMP-1	
mesotrypsin	PRSS3, trypsin IV	PAR1; PAR2; PAR4; CD109; proKLK5; proKLK7; APPI; APLP2; TFPI-1; TFPI-2; HAI-2; bikunin; TFPI-2	
KLK2		PAR2; proKLKs	
KLK3	prostate-specific antigen (PSA)	proKLKs	
KLK4		PAR1; PAR2; proKLKs; pro-uPA	
KLK5		desmoglein-1; proKLKs	
KLK6		PAR2; proADAM-10	
KLK7		E-cadherin; desmoglein-2	
KLK13		laminin	
chymase		proMMPs; LTBP-1	
matriptase	MT-SP1	laminin-332; proHGF; proMSP; PDGF-C; PDGF-D; PAR2; desmoglein-2; pro-matriptase; pro-uPA	
hepsin		laminin-332; fibronectin; proHGF; proMSP; pro-hepsin; pro-uPA	
TMPRSS2		nidogen-1; proHGF; proTMPRSS2; pro-matriptase	
neutrophil elastase	elastase 2; HLE; PMN elastase	elastin; thrombospondin-1; laminin-111; proteoglycans; LTBP-1; proMMP-3; TIMP-1	
cathepsin G		elastin; thrombospondin-1; RANKL; PAR1; proMMP-3; pro-MMP9	
S9	DPP IV	CD26	CXCL9; CXCL10; CXCL11	
FAP	seprase	collagen I	


	
Cysteine proteases	C1	cathepsin B		collagen I, II, IV; laminin; fibronectin; proteoglycans; E-cadherin; pro-cathepsin D; pro-uPA; TIMP-1; TIMP-2	
cathepsin L		collagen I, II, IV; laminin; fibronectin; elastin; proteoglycans; E-cadherin; EphA2; pro-cathepsin D; proheparanase	
cathepsin S		collagen I, II, IV; laminin-332; fibronectin; elastin; nidogen-1 and -2; proteoglycans; E-cadherin; EphA2; JAM-B	
C13	legumain		fibronectin; pro-legumain; pro-cathepsins; proMMP-2	


	
Aspartic proteases	A1	cathepsin D		collagen I, III; fibronectin; plasminogen; proteoglycans; FGF-2; pro-cathepsin B, pro-cathepsin L; cystatin C	
a Proteases and substrates listed are representative rather than comprehensive. Further details and references are found within the text.

Metalloproteases

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), belonging to protease family M10, were among the first extracellular proteases recognized for their role in cancer progression due to their involvement in degrading the ECM, a critical step in tumor invasion and metastasis (18, 19). There are 23 MMPs in humans, including 17 secreted and 6 membrane-associated proteases (20). Among these, Membrane-type 1 MMP (MT1-MMP, or MMP-14), is crucial for the initial stages of invasion by degrading fibrillar collagen (21, 22, 23, 24), while the gelatinases MMP-2 and MMP-9, along with other MMPs, further degrade the resultant collagen fragments and other ECM proteins (25, 26). These functions are further discussed in the sub-section, “Degradation and remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM)”. MMP functions in cancer progression extend far beyond ECM degradation, as fewer than 20% of demonstrated MMP substrates are ECM proteins (27). MMPs also regulate chemokines, cytokines, cell membrane receptors, and other signaling molecules by cleaving specific sites (28). MMPs activate and release growth factors and pro-angiogenic signaling molecules, as detailed in the sub-section, “Release, activation, and inactivation of soluble signaling molecules”. MMPs also facilitate cancer cell invasion and malignancy by cleaving cell-surface adhesion molecules, discussed further in the sub-section “Cleavage of transmembrane proteins”. For example, MMP-3, MMP-7, and MMP-9 specifically target E-cadherin to promote cancer cell migration and invasion (29, 30, 31, 32).

The MMP family belongs to the larger metzincin clan (33), which also encompasses the adamalysins, another family of metalloproteases influential in cancer. Adamalysins include the ADAM and ADAMTS branches of the protease family M12. The 13 catalytically active human ADAMs (named for their domain structure including a disintegrin and metalloprotease), are transmembrane-anchored sheddases, the best studied of which are ADAM-10 and ADAM-17. These proteases cleave membrane-associated protein substrates to release soluble ectodomains that can initiate cancer-related signaling processes (34). ADAMs trigger pro-tumorigenic processes through the release of cytokines and growth factors, described in the sub-section “Release, activation, and inactivation of soluble signaling molecules”, and by cleaving receptors and adhesion molecules, described in the sub-section “Cleavage of transmembrane proteins” (35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40).

The 19 human ADAMTSs (a disintegrin and metalloprotease with thrombospondin motifs), while structurally similar to ADAMs, lack a transmembrane domain and are secreted proteases (41). ADAMTSs participate in shaping the ECM by maturing pro-collagens and cleaving proteoglycans including aggrecan, versican, and brevican, releasing angiogenesis-modulating factors; some ADAMTSs also exhibit sheddase activity (41). In the context of cancer, ADAMTSs contribute to angiogenesis and metastasis through their actions on the ECM and their sheddase functions (42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47).

Structure

Metzincins, which include MMPs, ADAMs, and ADAMTSs, share a similar structure in their catalytic domains, characterized by combined α and β folds (33). These proteases often have additional domains for substrate recognition and interaction. MMP-7, structurally the simplest, contains a minimal catalytic domain (48) without extra substrate-binding modules. It forms a compact sphere with a shallow catalytic cleft, dividing it into larger N-terminal and smaller C-terminal subdomains (Fig. 1A, left panel). Adamalysins differ from MMPs by having two additional α-helices in their catalytic domains (33). In both MMPs and adamalysins, a conserved sequence at the junction between N- and C-terminal subdomains contains the characteristic conserved sequence H-E-X-X-H-X-X-G-X-X-H (where X is a nonconserved residue). The first seven of these residues form a helix at the back of the active site cleft, with a tight turn at the glycine placing the final histidine near the other two histidines to form a zinc-binding site (Fig. 1A, center panel). High-resolution crystal structures of MMPs reveal the active site geometry, including a catalytic water molecule coordinated to both the catalytic zinc ion and the nearby catalytic glutamate residue, and several other water molecules (49).Figure 1 Protease structures and chemical mechanisms.A, the structure of MMP-7 (PDB 1MMQ (48)) is shown as a representative MMP catalytic domain (left panel). The domain is divided by a horizontal catalytic cleft separating the upper N-terminal subdomain (light salmon) and lower C-terminal subdomain (dark salmon). Substrates bind in the cleft oriented left-to-right in the N- to C-terminal direction, placing the scissile bond near to the catalytic zinc ion (gray sphere). Catalytic site detail (center panel) shows the catalytic zinc (gray) coordinated by three histidine residues and near to a catalytic glutamate residue (yellow). The zinc ion and glutamate residue play key roles in catalysis. The β-strand above the catalytic site serves as the substrate polypeptide binding site (PBS). In the conserved catalytic mechanism of MMPs and other metzincins (right panel), the catalytic glutamate acts as a base to deprotonate the hydrolytic water, facilitating nucleophilic attack of hydroxide ion on the scissile bond. In the tetrahedral transition state, the oxyanion is stabilized by coordination to the zinc ion. The glutamate subsequently protonates the scissile bond nitrogen to facilitate the cleavage of the peptide bond. B, the structure of mesotrypsin (PDB 5TP0 (121)) is shown as a representative S1 serine protease catalytic domain (left panel). The domain is comprised of two β-barrels, with the active site located at their interface. The right barrel (light blue) contributes catalytic residues His-57 and Asp-102, while the left barrel (dark blue) contributes the catalytic Ser-195. Substrates bind in a horizontal cleft oriented left-to-right in the N- to C-terminal direction, placing the scissile bond near the catalytic Ser-195. The catalytic site detail (center panel) shows the catalytic triad in yellow. Black lines indicate the positions of hydrogen bond participants of the oxyanion hole (OaH) and the polypeptide binding site (PBS). In the conserved catalytic mechanism of serine proteases (right panel), histidine acts as a base to deprotonate serine. Serine acts as a nucleophile to attack the scissile bond, leading to the first tetrahedral intermediate, in which the oxyanion is stabilized by hydrogen bonding with backbone amide groups of the oxyanion hole. Histidine then donates a proton to facilitate bond breaking and departure of the amine leaving group, with the formation of the covalent acyl-enzyme intermediate. In the second half of the mechanism, histidine again serves as a base to activate the hydrolytic water molecule, facilitating nucleophilic attack on the acyl-enzyme to form the second tetrahedral intermediate, again stabilized by the oxyanion hole. Finally, histidine donates a proton back to serine in coordination with the release of the carboxylic acid product. C, representative of cysteine cathepsins, cathepsin B (PDB 1GMY (159)) is comprised of two domains (left panel), with the active site at their interface. By convention, the α-helical domain (light green) is referred to as the L domain, and the β-barrel domain (dark green) is referred to as the R domain; here, the molecule is rotated to align the substrate binding cleft from left to right as pictured for the other protease families, placing the L domain on top and the R domain beneath. The catalytic site detail (center panel) shows the catalytic triad residues Cys-25, His-159, and Asn-175 (papain numbering convention) in yellow. Black lines indicate the positions of hydrogen bonding components of the oxyanion hole (OaH) and the polypeptide binding site (PBS). In the conserved catalytic mechanism of C1 cysteine proteases (right panel), the Cys-25 thiolate anion attacks the scissile bond, proceeding through a first tetrahedral intermediate which is stabilized by an oxyanion hole. His-159 donates a proton to assist the departure of the amine leaving group, with the formation of the covalent acyl-enzyme intermediate. Subsequently, the acyl-enzyme is hydrolyzed by a nucleophilic water molecule, proceeding through a second tetrahedral intermediate, with His-159 assisting as a base. D, the structure of A1 aspartic protease cathepsin D (PDB 1LYB (189)) is comprised of two β-barrel domains separated by a six-stranded β-sheet, with the active site at the domain interface (left panel). The mature enzyme is proteolytically processed (site marked by orange bracket) to generate the 2-chain enzyme, shown with an N-terminal light chain in light purple and a C-terminal heavy chain in dark purple. Substrates bind in a cleft, oriented left-to-right, between the domains, placing the scissile bond near the catalytic aspartates. A flexible β-turn “flap” (orange arrow) adjusts to enclose the substrate upon binding. The catalytic site detail (center panel) shows the two catalytic aspartates in yellow. Black lines indicate the positions of hydrogen bonding components of the polypeptide binding site (PBS). In the conserved catalytic mechanism of A1 aspartic proteases (right panel), anionic Asp-231 abstracts a proton from the hydrolytic water, while Asp-33 donates a proton to the substrate carbonyl oxygen, generating a gem-diol tetrahedral intermediate. The two aspartates subsequently swap their roles as acid and base to facilitate the breaking of the scissile peptide bond.

Substrates bind in the catalytic cleft with the scissile bond near the zinc ion, catalytic water, and catalytic glutamate residue, displacing other water molecules. The substrate peptide backbone aligns via hydrogen bonding of P2 and P1ʹ substrate residues to create an antiparallel β-sheet with the enzyme (50). Substrate specificity arises from the recognition of substrate side chains by enzyme subsites. Most influential is the deep hydrophobic S1ʹ subsite formed in part by the long and variable “specificity loop” of the enzyme (33, 50), which typically favors leucine and other bulky hydrophobic residues at the P1ʹ position. Another important element of substrate specificity is the shallow hydrophobic S3 pocket, which favors proline at the P3 position (51). Comprehensive specificity profiling of many family members using high-throughput methods like peptide substrate phage display screening (52) and proteomic screening of human peptide sequences (27) has uncovered more variable substrate preferences among different MMPs at positions P2, P1, P2ʹ, and P3ʹ.

Catalytic mechanism

Metzincins share a broadly conserved catalytic mechanism (Fig. 1A, right panel) (33, 50). The catalytic water molecule becomes polarized by interaction with both the zinc ion and the glutamate residue, which enhances its nucleophilicity. The catalytic glutamate residue abstracts a proton from the water molecule, facilitating attack by the resultant hydroxide ion on the scissile bond, which leads to the formation of a tetrahedral transition state in which the oxyanion is stabilized by coordination with the zinc ion and an auxiliary water molecule (53). In the next phase, the tetrahedral intermediate breaks down, forming the product complex through a series of coordinated proton transfers (50). In the final double-product complex, the newly formed C-terminus interacts with the catalytic zinc, while the newly formed N-terminus engages with the catalytic glutamate. A new water then enters, binds to the zinc ion, and displaces the C-terminal product, leading to further rearrangements in the active site that stimulate the release of the N-terminal product (49, 50).

Serine proteases

The S1 serine protease family, also known as the chymotrypsin or trypsin family, is the largest single family of human proteases, with 118 characterized and putative enzymes (Mammalian Degradome Database: http://degradome.uniovi.es/dindex.html; (54)). These proteases are mostly secreted or extracellularly oriented transmembrane proteins, although a few perform intracellular proteolytic functions. Many members of this family have been linked to tumor progression and metastasis, including the tumor cell-produced urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and its substrate plasmin, involved in the directed degradation of ECM during cellular invasion as well as in activation of the collagen-degrading MMPs (25, 26).

Tumor cells can also activate the serine protease-mediated coagulation cascade, leading to the activation of thrombin. Thrombin plays a key role in metastasis by converting fibrinogen into fibrin and activating platelets (55, 56, 57). Activated platelets aggregate with tumor cells, forming cellular complexes that adhere to the endothelium and subendothelial matrix, facilitating extravasation. These processes also contribute to tumor growth, angiogenesis, and escape from immune surveillance (58, 59, 60, 61, 62). Thrombin also cleaves and activates protease-activated receptors (PARs), triggering signal transduction pathways with far-reaching impact on cellular proliferation, survival, and motility (59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64), as described further in the sub-section “Cleavage of transmembrane proteins”. It should be noted that signaling through cleavage of PARs, although elucidated initially for thrombin/PAR1 (65), extends to many other serine proteases (66, 67, 68, 69), and even proteases from other classes (70).

Trypsins, another branch of the S1 family, are also implicated in ECM degradation during tumor cell invasion (71), activation of uPA (72) and MMP zymogens (73, 74), and signaling through cleavage of PARs (75, 76). Specifically, the trypsin isoform PRSS3/mesotrypsin is noted for its role in several types of cancer, targeting a restricted subset of substrates that include PARs and proteinaceous inhibitors of other serine proteases, as described further in the sub-section, “Regulation of other enzymes within the protease web – activation of zymogens, degradation of inhibitors” (77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83).

The kallikreins, a significant branch of the S1 family with 15 secreted enzymes, are often upregulated in different forms of cancer. Some of these proteases serve as biomarkers of cancer progression, including most notably kallikrein-related peptidase 3 (KLK3, also known as prostate-specific antigen PSA), and many have also been investigated as potential contributors to cancer progression, reviewed in (84). While direct roles in tumor progression are not fully established for most KLKs, cell culture studies suggest that these enzymes participate in protease activation cascades (85, 86, 87, 88), cleave various ECM proteins and adhesion molecules (88, 89, 90, 91, 92), and signal through PARs (93, 94, 95), potentially influencing tumor growth.

The type II transmembrane serine proteases (TTSPs), another significant branch of the S1 family, include 17 members in humans. Of these, ten have been studied in cancer, acting either as tumor promoters or suppressors, depending on the protease and the context (96). Key TTSPs implicated in cancer development and progression include matriptase, hepsin, and TMPRSS2. These enzymes cleave and activate growth factors, such as hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), triggering signaling pathways leading to tumor growth, progression, and metastasis as described in the sub-section “Release, activation, and inactivation of soluble signaling molecules” (97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102). They also activate other pro-tumorigenic proteases, including uPA (102, 103, 104, 105). Matriptase, specifically, can directly cleave and initiate oncogenic signaling through PAR2, detailed in the sub-section “Cleavage of transmembrane proteins” (103, 106).

Secreted neutrophil serine proteases, especially neutrophil elastase and cathepsin G, contribute to metastasis through ECM degradation and remodeling (107, 108), MMP activation (109), and membrane receptor cleavage (110, 111). Recent evidence suggests that the role of neutrophil elastase in cancer may be more complex than previously thought, as it has been discovered that neutrophil elastase can enter cells through endocytosis and selectively kill malignant cells through cleavage of intracellular death receptor CD95 (112). This new understanding challenges the previously established paradigm that neutrophil elastase only promotes tumor growth and progression. Additional studies are needed to clarify the dual nature of neutrophil elastase in different pathological settings.

The S9 serine protease family includes several type-II transmembrane proteases unrelated to the TTSPs. The best studied among these in cancer progression are dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPP IV; also known as CD26) and fibroblast activation protein (FAP; also known as seprase). DPP IV, located on epithelial cells and lymphocytes, plays a crucial role in cancer by processing peptide hormones, chemokines, and neuropeptides through the proteolytic removal of N-terminal dipeptides. This action can either activate or deactivate these molecules, depending on the specific substrate involved. As a result, DPP IV significantly influences immune system regulation by influencing chemokine signaling. DPP IV also exhibits complex biological activities, both pro- and anti-tumorigenic, in different disease settings (113). Notably, it promotes tumor growth by altering interferon-inducible chemokines like CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11, converting these agonists of receptor CXCR3 to antagonists, and greatly reducing chemotactic potency (114). This activity of DPP IV can suppress host antitumoral immune responses, and DPP IV inhibition has shown promise in enhancing natural tumor immunity and improving responses to immunotherapy, for example in models of hepatocellular carcinoma and melanoma (115, 116). FAP is expressed primarily on the surface of activated fibroblasts and some invasive tumor cells (117, 118). It displays protumorigenic activities in colon and lung cancer models, linked to its role in remodeling, degrading, and clearing collagen fragments (119, 120). Due to its involvement in these processes, FAP has been extensively studied as a potential biomarker for cancer and as a target for imaging agents in cancer diagnosis and treatment.

Structure

Members of the S1 serine protease family share a similar composite catalytic domain comprised of two β-barrels, with the active site located at the interface between the barrels, as exemplified by human mesotrypsin (121) (Fig. 1B, left panel). Some S1 family proteases have extra accessory domains that help in substrate recognition or perform regulatory functions, enhancing their specificity and functional diversity. Chymotrypsin, elastase, and trypsin were among the first protein structures revealed by X-ray crystallography (122, 123, 124, 125), and trypsin was among the first proteins probed by site-directed mutagenesis (15, 126, 127, 128), contributing to our understanding of their mechanism. All active proteases in the family feature a catalytic triad consisting of serine, histidine, and aspartate; in the chymotrypsin numbering convention, these residues are Ser-195, His-57, and Asp-102 (Fig. 1B, center panel).

The substrate binds within a groove crossing the enzyme horizontally, such that the nonprimed substrate residues interact with the enzyme’s left barrel and the primed residues interact with the right barrel. The interaction involves an antiparallel β-sheet pattern of hydrogen bonds between the P3 and P1 substrate residues and a β-strand of the enzyme, forming the polypeptide binding site (15). The scissile bond of the bound substrate is positioned near the catalytic serine side chain. Substrate specificity is conferred by the interaction of the substrate sidechains with enzyme subsites, with recognition of the P1 side chain by the S1 specificity pocket playing a dominant role. Many enzymes in this family cleave after lysine or arginine; these proteases characteristically possess an Asp-189 residue at the base of the deep S1 specificity pocket, which forms a salt bridge with the bound substrate. Mutagenesis studies have shown that P1 specificity depends not only on the enzyme residues that directly contact the substrate but also on several surface loops of the enzyme that maintain the conformational stability of the S1 specificity pocket (15, 129, 130). Substrate specificity at more distant subsites is also modulated by multiple surface loops of the enzymes that vary significantly among family members in terms of their length, sequence, and conformation. The dynamics of these surface loops can also regulate enzyme activity and control access to the substrate-binding site (129, 130).

S9 family catalytic domains belong to the α/β hydrolase superfamily, a different fold from the S1 family, and also feature a Ser-His-Asp catalytic triad (131, 132). Proteases including DPP IV and FAP have an additional 8-bladed β propeller domain and require dimerization for activity. The catalytic site is located within a large cleft between the two domains, and both the propeller and catalytic domains contribute to substrate binding and the dimerization interface. The histidine residue of the catalytic triad is situated in a loop that is part of the dimerization interface, accounting for the requirement for dimer formation to stabilize the active site and enhance enzyme activity (132). DPP IV and related family members cleave N-terminal dipeptides specifically after P1 proline residues, as favored by the hydrophobic S1 subsite within the catalytic domain. The charged amino terminus of the P2 residue is positioned via salt bridges formed with a double glutamate motif located within an α-helical insertion of the β propeller domain (131, 132). Despite the unique architecture of their catalytic domain, the chemical mechanism of catalysis in S9 family serine proteases is believed to follow a stepwise sequence very similar to that found in the S1 family serine proteases.

Catalytic mechanism

S1 family serine proteases share a conserved multistep catalytic mechanism (Fig. 1B, right panel) (15). Upon productive binding of the substrate, the catalytic serine is activated as a nucleophile through deprotonation by histidine. The serine hydroxyl then attacks the carbonyl carbon of the scissile peptide bond, leading to the formation of a transient tetrahedral intermediate, which closely resembles the transition state of the reaction. In this intermediate, the negative charge of the oxyanion is stabilized by hydrogen bonds with the backbone amide groups of Ser-195 and Gly-193 (chymotrypsin numbering), a configuration referred to as the oxyanion hole (133). The tetrahedral intermediate then collapses with the departure of the amine leaving group, leading to the formation of the more stable covalent acyl-enzyme. A water molecule enters the active site and becomes activated for nucleophilic attack on the acyl-enzyme, via deprotonation by His-57. The nucleophilic attack leads to a second tetrahedral intermediate, again stabilized by the oxyanion hole. This intermediate then collapses, with the Ser-195 hydroxyl group reclaiming a proton from His-57, in coordination with the release of the carboxylic acid product. Many high-resolution crystal structures have validated the molecular details of the serine protease reaction sequence. Atomic resolution structures of trypsin acyl-enzymes with substrates have clearly shown the water molecule involved in hydrolysis (134). While the authentic tetrahedral intermediates for efficient substrates are too unstable to be directly observed, they have been modeled by inhibitor complexes that mimic these intermediates (134, 135) and corroborated by theoretical studies (136). These studies have revealed that His-57 and Ser-195 undergo subtle shifts in orientation during the reaction, facilitating the progression of the catalytic reaction.

There has been considerable debate about the precise role of Asp-102, the third member of the catalytic triad. It is strategically positioned for hydrogen bonding with His-57, and its mutagenesis can slow catalysis by four orders of magnitude (126). Initially, it was proposed that Asp-102 participates in a charge relay system by accepting a proton from His-57 (137, 138). A subsequent concept proposed that His-57 and Asp-102 may form a strong, low-barrier hydrogen bond, sharing a proton to enhance the nucleophilicity of Ser-195 (139). A more recently proposed theory, aligning with NMR data on the pKa values of these residues, suggests that ionized Asp-102 stabilizes the charge on His-57 in the tetrahedral intermediate and properly orients His-57 with the correct tautomer to function as a base in relation to Ser-195 and the substrate (15, 126). This alternate model gained support from studies on α-lytic protease, a bacterial homolog of the mammalian S1 family proteases. A sub-angstrom crystal structure of α-lytic protease bound to a peptidyl boronic acid, mimicking the transition state, placed the proton on an ionized His-57 hydrogen bonded to an ionized Asp-102 (135). Additionally, a multinuclear 3D-NMR study showed that the pKa of Asp-102 is below 1.5, inconsistent with the matched pKa values that would be required for a low-barrier hydrogen bond (140), further supporting this alternative model. The current consensus on the catalytic mechanism is that a network of ordinary hydrogen bonds, including the His-57 – Asp-102 interaction, cooperatively positions the catalytic triad and substrate for reaction and stabilizes the oxyanion transition state (15, 135, 141). The importance of this network of remote interactions, which becomes most optimized in the transition state, is also supported by observations from many S1 family proteases that substrate discrimination is largely due to faster cleavage rates of good substrates (higher kcat), rather than differences in substrate binding affinity (Km) (15).

Cysteine proteases

Cathepsins are a group of proteases functioning under acidic conditions within the lysosome and do not belong to a single mechanistic class or evolutionary family, but instead include serine proteases (cathepsins A and G), aspartic proteases (cathepsins D and E), and 11 human proteases of the C1 cysteine protease family, which are related to the plant enzyme papain (142). Cysteine cathepsins, beyond their vital roles inside cells, can also be secreted into the extracellular space (143), a characteristic often observed in cancer cells. This secretion also plays a crucial role whereby certain immune cells, particularly macrophages, affect the tumor microenvironment (144, 145). Like MMPs, cysteine cathepsins were initially recognized for their roles in cancer progression through their ability to degrade many different ECM proteins, contributing to tumor invasion, metastasis, and angiogenesis (146, 147, 148). Broad profiling of the degradomes of cathepsins B, H, L, S, and Z in a murine pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor model supports general protein degradation as the dominant functional role of cathepsins in this cancer (149). These and other studies have also revealed additional roles for cathepsins, including the targeted proteolytic processing of specific substrates, which can have protumorigenic effects in different cancer contexts (143, 150). Examples of these additional roles include the ectodomain shedding of cell surface adhesion molecules (151, 152, 153), the activation of pro-enzymes through proteolysis (154), and the release of bioactive protein fragments derived from the ECM (155). Legumain, a distinct cysteine protease of family C13, is another lysosomal enzyme frequently upregulated in cancer. It also can be secreted into the extracellular space, where it can be associated with ECM or with the cell surface (156). Outside the cell, legumain appears to promote metastasis through nonproteolytic signaling mediated through binding to integrins (157). While experiments have demonstrated legumain’s enzymatic activity in cancer (158), there is limited evidence for the role of its extracellular proteolytic function in promoting cancer phenotypes.

Structure

The cysteine cathepsins adopt the papain protein fold comprising two domains, one primarily α-helical and the other a β-barrel with short helical segments, with the active site located at the domain interface. The structure of human cathepsin B (159) illustrates this arrangement (Fig. 1C, left panel). Cathepsin B was the first cysteine cathepsin to be structurally characterized (160) and remains the most thoroughly studied. The catalytic triad consists of Cys-25 from the α-helical domain and His-159 and Asn-175 from the β-barrel domain (papain numbering system; Fig. 1C, center panel). The extended polypeptide chain of a substrate binds in a groove crossing the enzyme, with substrate side chains contacting alternately with the α-helical and β-barrel domains (142). Most cysteine cathepsins are endopeptidases, but some also possess amino- or carboxyterminal exopeptidase activity. Cathepsin B, for example, acts as both an endopeptidase and a carboxydipeptidase, with the latter activity conferred by the interaction of the substrate C-terminal P2ʹ residue with an occluding loop in the α-helical domain (142, 160). Cysteine cathepsins use an antiparallel pattern of hydrogen bonds for generic substrate recognition. A short loop from the α-helical domain bonds with the substrate P2 main chain, and a β-barrel strand bonds with the substrate P1 main chain (159, 161) (Fig. 1C, center panel). The primary determinant of substrate specificity is the S2 pocket, formed by interacting residues on both domains, typically preferring small hydrophobic or aromatic P2 residues (142, 150). The specificity of cysteine cathepsins is further influenced by the S1 and S1ʹ sites, formed by the α-helical and β-barrel domains, respectively (142, 150). While subsites more distant from the cleavage site have a lesser impact on substrate specificity, proteomic profiling has shown that cathepsin B exhibits a strong preference for glycine at the P3ʹ position, attributable to steric restrictions imposed by the occluding loop (162).

Catalytic mechanism

C1 family proteases, including cysteine cathepsins, follow a catalytic mechanism similar to papain (Fig. 1C, right panel) (163). Unlike the serine proteases where substrate binding triggers the deprotonation of the serine nucleophile, papain-like enzymes have a pre-formed nucleophilic thiolate-imidazolium ion pair, formed by catalytic residues Cys-25 and His-159 (papain numbering), in the pH range of 4 to 8 where the enzymes are active (164, 165, 166). A computational study supports the stability of the thiolate-imidazolium ion pair in the resting state of human cathepsin B (167). The third residue in the catalytic triad, Asn-175, also significantly contributes to the catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km) of papain (168) and human cathepsin S (169), as shown by mutagenesis studies. This contribution, which mainly affects the catalytic rate constant (kcat), suggests that Asn-175 plays a key role in stabilizing the thiolate-imidazolium ion pair. Catalysis is initiated by nucleophilic attack on the scissile peptide bond by the thiolate anion, leading to a covalent tetrahedral transition state or short-lived intermediate, followed by formation of an acyl-enzyme intermediate, with His-159 contributing a proton to assist leaving group departure (Fig. 1C, right panel). Subsequently, the acyl enzyme is hydrolyzed by a nucleophilic water molecule, with His-159 assisting as a base. The oxyanion in both the transition state and tetrahedral intermediate is stabilized by an oxyanion hole formed by the backbone amide of Cys-25 and the side chain amide of Gln-19 (Fig. 1C, center panel). While computational studies have provided conflicting results on the involvement of the hypothetical tetrahedral intermediate in the papain reaction mechanism (170, 171, 172), experimental evidence strongly supports its existence. Mutagenesis studies on papain showed that conversion of Gln-19 to alanine or serine decreased kcat/Km by 60-600-fold, primarily by decreasing the catalytic rate constant kcat (173), highlighting the importance of this residue in stabilizing the transition state. Additionally, the crystal structure of papain, covalently inhibited by the transition state analog leupeptin, revealed the tetrahedral oxyanion to be hydrogen bonded in the oxyanion hole (161). Further, a computational study of the human cathepsin K reaction mechanism reinforces the importance of the conserved oxyanion hole in stabilizing both the transition state and the tetrahedral intermediate in cysteine cathepsins (174).

Aspartic proteases

Aspartic cathepsins, like cysteine cathepsins, are primarily lysosomal enzymes that under some conditions can be extracellularly secreted. Cathepsin D is notable for its regulated secretion during physiological processes including lactation and mammary gland involution; it is also overexpressed and constitutively secreted by breast and some other cancers (175). Cathepsin D has been implicated in multiple aspects of cancer development and progression, including proliferation, invasion, metastasis, angiogenesis, and resistance to apoptosis (176, 177, 178, 179). The influence of cathepsin D in cancer is partly due to intracellular actions and nonproteolytic signaling outside cells (177, 179, 180, 181). Notably, the secreted enzyme is mostly present in activated form (182), and some cancer-promoting actions involve extracellular proteolysis, such as degrading ECM components and releasing ECM-sequestered fibroblast growth factor 2 (183, 184). Furthermore, the co-localization of cathepsin D with other secreted proteases in the tumor microenvironment can regulate and amplify their tumorigenic activities. For example, activation of pro-cathepsin B secreted by a colorectal cancer cell line was found to be mediated by cathepsin D (185), and cathepsin D can also upregulate cysteine cathepsin activity through degradation of cystatin C, a potent natural inhibitor of cysteine cathepsins (186). In an interesting reciprocal relationship, cysteine cathepsins including cathepsin B are also the major proteolytic activators of cathepsin D in the lysosome (187), and potentially also in the extracellular environment.

Structure

Aspartic cathepsins, which include cathepsin D, are part of the A1 aspartic protease family and adopt a pepsin-like fold. This structure consists of two similar β-barrel domains and a six-stranded anti-parallel β-sheet between them (188, 189) (Fig. 1D, left panel). In active cathepsin D, the N-terminal β-barrel domain is cleaved within a surface loop, creating the two-chain form. Like cysteine and serine proteases, the active site is located at the domain interface, with Asp-33 from the N-terminal domain and Asp-231 from the C-terminal domain forming the catalytic dyad (Fig. 1D, center panel). The extended polypeptide chain of a bound substrate lies in a groove between the domains, crossing the enzyme from left to right. Cathepsin D features an extensive polypeptide binding site in which multiple segments of both domains form backbone-to-backbone hydrogen bonds with the P3 – P2ʹ residues of a bound substrate (188, 189) (as indicated in Fig. 1D, center panel). The scissile bond of the bound substrate is positioned near the catalytic aspartate residues. Cathepsin D favors large hydrophobic residues in the P1 and P1ʹ positions and accommodates bulky P2 and P4 residues in its broad catalytic cleft (188, 189). A flexible β-turn, or “flap”, within the N-terminal domain adjusts slightly to enclose the substrate upon binding (189).

Catalytic mechanism

Based on homology to other A1 family aspartic proteases, cathepsin D and E likely follow a catalytic mechanism similar to that of mammalian pepsin and several related fungal proteases (190) (Fig. 1D, right panel). In the free enzyme, Asp-33 is protonated and Asp-231 is charged, with a hydrolytic water molecule positioned between them. When a substrate binds, the water becomes polarized for nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl carbon of the scissile peptide bond. Asp-231 accepts a proton from the hydrolytic water, while Asp-33 donates a proton to the substrate carbonyl oxygen, leading to the formation of a gem-diol tetrahedral intermediate. This mechanism aligns with high-resolution X-ray and neutron crystal structures of aspartic proteases complexed with inhibitors that form a gem-diol, mimicking the tetrahedral intermediate and transition state, and revealing precise bond lengths and the positions of key protons (190, 191, 192). Subsequently, breakage of the scissile peptide bond is assisted by the donation of a proton to the leaving amino group by Asp-231 or water, along with the recapture of a proton by Asp-33 to regenerate the active enzyme configuration. Comparisons of dozens of crystal structures of aspartic proteases have revealed a network of additional conserved residues and an additional water molecule that hydrogen bond to the catalytic aspartate residues and to the substrate, regulating the protonation states of the catalytic dyad during the catalytic cycle (193). Recent computational studies have further proposed a role for n → π∗ interactions in which developing negative charge on the diol oxygens is donated to carbonyl acceptors within the substrate P1ʹ residue and a conserved glycine of the protease, sequentially facilitating nucleophilic attack by water and peptide bond scission (194, 195). The n → π∗ donation mechanism is primarily supported by high-resolution structures of HIV protease, a member of the A2 family of viral aspartic proteases. Similar active site geometry is observed in structures of A1 family mammalian proteases such as renin and β-secretase, supporting the broader applicability of this mechanism across different aspartic protease families.

The making of villains—posttranslational regulation and dysregulation of proteases

The extracellular proteases described earlier play vital roles in essential biological functions through regulated proteolysis of protein substrates. However, these same actions can become problematic when they are dysregulated in the context of cancer. One form of dysregulation is transcriptional upregulation, which occurs widely for protease genes in cancers (196), although not the focus of this review. Once translated into protein, proteases undergo further regulatory processes which are also widely dysregulated in cancer, resulting in increased proteolytic activity and increased proteolysis of particular substrates with pathological outcomes.

Maintenance of latency and proteolytic activation

Proteases are typically produced as inactive precursors, or zymogens, with limited catalytic activity. They attain full activity through proteolytic cleavage and removal of an N-terminal propeptide or prodomain, which then reveals the fully active enzyme (197, 198). In the case of the MMP family (M10), the N-terminal prodomain is a small globular domain that sterically shields the active site (Fig. 2A, left panel). An extended loop of the prodomain fills the substrate-binding cleft of the catalytic domain in an opposite orientation to a true substrate. This loop contains the conserved “cysteine switch” motif P-R-C-G-X-P-D (199), in which the central cysteine residue coordinates to the catalytic zinc ion, displacing the catalytic water molecule and maintaining the zymogen’s latency (200) (Fig. 2A, right panel).Figure 2 Protease mechanisms of latency.A, the structure of the proMMP-3 catalytic domain (salmon; PDB 1SLM (421)) exemplifies the conserved mechanism of metallopeptidase latency, in which the active site is shielded by a prodomain (brown) comprised of three helices (left panel). Upon cleavage between the catalytic domain and prodomain (cleavage site indicated by the red arrow), the prodomain dissociates and the enzyme becomes activated. In the zymogen state, the cysteine residue of the cysteine switch (red) coordinates to the catalytic zinc (gray sphere), displacing the hydrolytic water molecule (right panel). B, the crystal structure of human trypsin 1 (periwinkle; PDB 2RA3 (422)) superimposed with the structure of bovine trypsinogen (gray, left panel; PDB 2TGT (423)) illustrates the conserved mechanism of S1 serine protease latency and activation. The zymogen and active forms show few significant differences aside from the untucked N-terminus in the zymogen form (red arrow), and the observation that loops comprising the activation domain (magenta) are unstructured (and thus invisible in the crystal structure) in the zymogen state. Upon cleavage to remove the propeptide, the new N-terminal residue Ile-16 tucks into the catalytic domain to form a salt bridge (black dashed line) between the protein chain N-terminal amine and the Asp-194 side chain (right panel). Formation of this salt bridge brings structure to the oxyanion hole by orienting the amide nitrogens of Gly-193 and Ser-195, and shapes the S1 specificity pocket to confer catalytic activity. C, the structure of procathepsin C (PDB 3PBH (424)) illustrates how the prodomain (orange) binds and inhibits the catalytic domain (green). The prodomain N-terminal segment contains two helices and forms hydrophobic interactions with the “prosegment binding loop” (left panel, orange arrow). An extended stretch of prodomain residues crosses the active site (catalytic triad in yellow), occupying the substrate-binding cleft in reverse orientation to a true substrate (detail in right panel). Low pH disrupts the prodomain structure and electrostatic interactions with the catalytic domain to facilitate proteolytic cleavage at a site indicated by the red arrow, left panel, and release of the prodomain. D, a homology model of human procathepsin D (left panel) illustrates how the prodomain (orange) binds and inhibits the catalytic domains (purple). The N-terminal segment of the prodomain forms a β-strand interacting with an exosite on the backside of the molecule, while the C-terminal segment of the prodomain covers the active site and inserts a Lys-Tyr anchor (orange arrow) to interact with the catalytic Asp residues (yellow). Activation involves dissociation of the prodomain and cleavage at a site indicated by the red arrow. In mature cathepsin D (right panel; PDB 1LYB (189)), the newly generated N-terminus (red arrow) undergoes a conformational change to form β-sheet interactions at the exosite vacated by the propeptide. Homology model was generated using Swiss-Model based on the structure of pepsinogen (PDB 2PSG (425)).

MMPs become activated through cleavage by an activating protease, releasing the prodomain. While the specific activating proteases vary by MMP and biological setting, known activators include other active MMPs and secreted serine proteases such as trypsin, plasmin, and mast cell chymases (201). Some MMPs, particularly the membrane-type MMPs, are activated by furin or other proprotein convertases in the secretory pathway before reaching the cell surface (202). Biophysical studies suggest that proteolytic activation begins with conformational changes in the zymogen induced by interactions with the activating protease, leading to the dissociation of the cysteine switch from the zinc ion and the gain of activity. Proteolytic cleavage of the prodomain then renders the activation permanent (203). For some MMPs, full activation may require multiple cleavage events, possibly involving a partially activated intermediate form of the MMP itself (204).

Similar to the membrane-type MMPs, ADAMs, and ADAMTSs from the M12 family typically undergo proteolytic activation within the secretory pathway by furin or other proprotein convertases, which cleave at multiple sites to mature the fully activated enzymes (205). Some ADAMs also use autoproteolytic mechanisms for activation (206). The prodomains of some M12 family members feature a functional cysteine switch as seen in MMPs (207) while in others, the conserved cysteine may bind to the catalytic zinc but is not essential for inhibition by the prodomain (208, 209).

S1 family serine proteases are produced as zymogens with N-terminal extensions of the catalytic domain. These extensions can range from short propeptides to large multi-domain pro-segments. The latency of these proteases is maintained by the deformation and lack of stable conformation in the “activation domain”, which comprises four loops of the catalytic domain that border the active site (Fig. 2B, left panel) (197, 210, 211). This deformed or unstructured region includes the S1 specificity pocket and the Gly-193 amide nitrogen of the oxyanion hole (chymotrypsin numbering convention). Upon activation through proteolytic cleavage, the newly formed amino terminus folds into the catalytic domain, creating a salt bridge with the buried Asp-194 (Fig. 2B, right panel). This conformational change results in the restructuring of the S1 specificity pocket and correct orientation of the hydrogen bond donors of the oxyanion hole, leading to full catalytic activity. Depending on the specific protease, the activating cleavage may be autocatalytic, mediated by another extracellular protease (often another S1 family member), or occur within the secretory pathway by furin or another proprotein convertase.

Many serine proteases are activated in physiological cascades, such as the sequential activation of coagulation factors leading to activation of thrombin, the activation of plasmin by plasminogen activators, or the enteropeptidase-mediated activation of trypsin, which then activates other digestive proteases (198). While the specific activators of individual KLKs are not fully defined in vivo, biochemical studies implicate a network of reciprocal activating cleavages within this S1 family branch (85). There is also potential for KLK activation by uPA, plasmin, and thrombin (212). The TTSPs hepsin and matriptase are known to autoactivate on the cell surface (213), while TMPRSS2 is autoactivated within the secretory pathway (214). In transgenic mouse models, matriptase autoactivation requires complex formation with the membrane serine protease prostasin as a nonenzymatic cofactor (215), although studies in human cell lines with endogenous matriptase expression suggest that the requirement for prostasin may not be universal (216).

Similar to metalloproteases, cysteine cathepsins are maintained as inactive zymogens by an N-terminal prodomain that physically blocks the active site. The prodomain of these enzymes interacts with two distinct regions: an N-terminal segment forms hydrophobic interactions with an exosite (the “prosegment binding loop”) on the surface of the catalytic domain, and an extended C-terminal stretch occupies the substrate-binding cleft in reverse orientation to a true substrate (Fig. 2C) (217, 218). Cysteine cathepsins are activated through an autocatalytic process initiated by the low pH within the lysosome. This acidic environment leads to pH-dependent destabilization of salt bridges and electrostatic interactions, consequently weakening the structural integrity of the prodomain and its interactions with the catalytic domain (197, 219). This process ultimately leads to dissociation of the prodomain and autocatalytic cleavage by the cysteine cathepsin.

Aspartic proteases, including cathepsin D, are kept in a latent state by an N-terminal propeptide that docks at two sites on the catalytic unit to physically block access to the active site. Although the crystal structure of mammalian cathepsin D zymogen has not been reported, insights into its mechanism of latency come from biochemical studies of cathepsin D and crystal structures of similar zymogens like pepsinogen and progastricsin. The latency involves an extended 14-residue N-terminal segment forming a high-affinity interaction with an exosite, while a C-terminal segment covers the active site. This segment inserts side chains of a conserved Lys-Tyr anchor to form a salt bridge with the catalytic aspartate residues (Fig. 2D, left panel) (197, 219). As in the cysteine cathepsins, these interactions are disrupted at low pH, leading to enzyme activation and rendering the propeptide susceptible to cleavage. Under acidic conditions, procathepsin D can self-process to remove much of the prodomain, generating active pseudo-cathepsin D. In vivo, however, the primary mechanism for activation and maturation of cathepsin D appears to involve a series of cleavages by the cysteine cathepsins B and L in endosomes and lysosomes (187, 220).

In mature cathepsin D, the new N-terminus undergoes a conformational change upon processing and binds to the exosite vacated by the propeptide (Fig. 2D, right panel). Interestingly, this conformation is stable only at low pH. At higher pH, the N-terminus dissociates from the exosite and can block the active site cleft, inhibiting the enzyme (221). For an insect cathepsin D homolog, it has been shown that a propeptide cleavage product can re-bind to the exosite at neutral pH, allosterically inhibiting the enzyme by shifting its conformation toward an autoinhibited state (222). It is yet to be determined whether similar regulation by the processed prodomain occurs in human cathepsin D.

Environmental factors play a significant role in modifying and regulating the rates of proteolytic activation of zymogens, including localization to specific sites or complexes, cofactor binding, and pH. These mechanisms can become dysregulated in cancer. Since most proteases are activated through cleavage by other proteases, the entire proteolytic network forms a complex web where the increased activity of one protease, caused by increased abundance or increased activation, can lead to the activation of additional proteases (223).

Activation rates can be regulated and potentially dysregulated through the colocalization of active proteases with their target zymogens. For example, proMMP-2 activation involves a unique cell surface complex that includes an MT1-MMP dimer and the inhibitor TIMP-2. In this complex, TIMP-2 binds to one MT1-MMP molecule in an inhibitory manner, while its non-inhibitory C-terminal domain binds to an exosite on the hemopexin-like domain of proMMP-2, positioning proMMP2 for activation by the second, uninhibited MT1-MMP molecule (224, 225). In invasive thyroid cancers, increased expression of MT1-MMP and its colocalization with proMMP-2 are associated with increased activation and activity of MMP-2 and the development of lymph node metastases (226).

Macromolecular cofactors, such as glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), can play an important role in regulating zymogen activation for many proteases. GAGs, which are oligosaccharide chains that decorate proteoglycans found on cell surfaces and throughout the extracellular matrix, can trigger conformational changes that accelerate autoactivation. For example, GAG binding to the prodomain of cathepsin B accelerates its autoactivation (227). Highly sulfated GAGs also accelerate MMP-7 activation by tethering multiple zymogen molecules along long oligosaccharide chains, facilitating proteolytic interaction among neighboring molecules (228, 229, 230). Similar allosteric and scaffolding effects may be at work among the many other proteases for which zymogen activation is stimulated by GAGs (229).

Another environmental factor influencing zymogen activation is pH. As described above, cysteine and aspartic cathepsins are triggered to activate at the low pH of endosomes and lysosomes. Extracellular acidosis, common in the tumor microenvironment, can also stimulate protease activation. Acidosis has been shown to enhance the autoactivation and shedding of matriptase in a wide variety of epithelial and carcinoma cell models (231, 232). Acidosis can also impact protease activation and proteolysis indirectly, through altered trafficking of lysosomes, cell surface association and secretion of lysosomal proteases, and altered localization and secretion of membrane-associated proteases (233).

In cancer, protease activation cascades and networks can be broadly dysregulated due to changes in protease expression and localization. Thus, protease zymogens are crucial substrates through which many proteases amplify their tumor-promoting effects. This concept is further explored in the sub-section “Regulation of other enzymes within the protease web – activation of zymogens, degradation of inhibitors”.

Regulation by endogenous inhibitors

Once activated, proteases are further regulated by endogenous protein protease inhibitors. The balance between proteases and their inhibitors is crucial for maintaining physiological homeostasis. Disruptions in this balance can lead to excessive proteolysis and contribute to cancer progression. The MMPs and adamalysins are regulated by the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs), which in humans consist of a family of four inhibitors with overlapping specificity (234). TIMPs possess two domains that pack side-by-side to form a wedge-shaped molecule, with the thin edge, composed of loops from both domains, binding in the substrate cleft of the protease catalytic domain (Fig. 3A, left panel) (235). The core binding epitope at the center of the wedge is formed by the N-terminal C-X-C motif, stabilized by disulfide bonds with two additional cysteine residues within the TIMP molecule. The uncharged N-terminal amine (236) and carbonyl oxygen of Cys-1 coordinate directly with the MMP catalytic zinc ion, displacing the catalytic water molecule and inhibiting enzyme activity (Fig. 3A, right panel). Beyond this central interaction, flanking loops from both TIMP domains wrap around the MMP, forming additional favorable molecular contacts with exosites on the catalytic domain that vary among different protease complexes (237).Figure 3 Protease regulation by endogenous protein inhibitors.A, the conserved mode of inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases by TIMPs is exemplified by the structure of the MMP-3 catalytic domain (salmon; catalytic residues in yellow) bound to TIMP-1 (PDB 1UEA (235)). The TIMP-1 N- and C-terminal domains (periwinkle and pale blue, respectively) pack side-by-side and interact with the MMP substrate-binding cleft via multiple loops (left panel). Detail (right panel) shows how N-terminal TIMP-1 residues Cys-1, Thr-2, and Cys-3 insert deeply into the catalytic site, with the N-terminal amine coordinating directly to the catalytic zinc ion (gray sphere). B, structures of α-1 antitrypsin (light pink) illustrate the mechanism by which serpins inhibit serine proteases. Native α-1 antitrypsin (left panel, PDB 3NE4 (426)) is shown with the bait loop colored in orange, and the central β-sheet is shown in raspberry. Upon cleavage at the site indicated by the orange arrow, the cleaved bait loop becomes inserted into the β-sheet to achieve a more stable protein conformation, as seen in the structure of the trypsin-cleaved α-1 antitrypsin acyl-enzyme (right panel, PDB 1EZX (244)). The red arrow indicates the position of the new β-strand insertion. The partially disordered trypsin molecule is rendered in blue. C, exemplary of canonical serine protease inhibitors, the structure of hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor-1 (HAI-1) Kunitz domain 1 (pink/orange) is shown to inhibit the matriptase catalytic domain (blue; PDB 4ISO (427)). The Kunitz domain is a small pear-shaped molecule with the canonical loop protruding at the apex and binding to the protease (left panel). Tight binding of the HAI-1 canonical loop (orange) in the matriptase active site (right panel) positions a reactive site bond (indicated by orange arrow) near the catalytic Ser-195, mimicking an ideal substrate. D, the inhibitory mechanism of the cystatin superfamily inhibitors is exemplified by the structure of stefin A (light blue/orange) bound to cathepsin B (green; PDB 3K9M (264)). Stefin A is a wedge-shaped molecule that inserts its N-terminal segment and two hairpin loops deeply into the cathepsin B catalytic cleft (left panel). The N-terminal segment fills non-primed substrate-binding subsites to the left of the catalytic site while the hairpin loops occupy primed subsites to the right of the catalytic site (right panel, protease-interacting segments shown in orange and enzyme catalytic residues shown in yellow).

In addition to their role as protease inhibitors, TIMPs also have protease-independent functions, exhibiting both tumor-promoting and tumor-suppressive effects (234). Accordingly, the relationships between TIMP expression and cancer outcomes can be complex. Nevertheless, regulation of protease activity by TIMPs is critical in controlling many of the tumor-promoting actions of metalloproteases. For example, MMP-9 is often regulated through co-expression with its inhibitor TIMP-1, which also binds to proMMP-9 via an exosite and protects the zymogen from activation. However, in the tumor microenvironment, neutrophils can secrete MMP-9 without TIMP-1, leading to its activation and subsequent stimulation of tumor angiogenesis, intravasation, and metastasis (238, 239, 240, 241).

The significance of TIMPs as tumor suppressors is underscored by studies with fibroblasts from quadruple TIMP knockout mice. These fibroblasts, which completely lack TIMP expression, exhibit characteristics of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), including the ability to augment growth, motility, and metastasis of co-transplanted tumor cells (242). The TIMPless fibroblasts influence tumor cell behavior by secretion of exosomes rich in ADAM-10, while knocking down ADAM-10 in these fibroblasts eliminates their CAF-like properties. Similarly, human CAFs secrete ADAM-10-rich exosomes, and human tumor stroma of multiple tumor types show reduced TIMP levels (242). These findings highlight the critical role of TIMPs in regulating activity of MMPs and adamalysins and how their loss in the tumor microenvironment can promote tumor growth and progression.

S1 family serine proteases are regulated by several types of endogenous protease inhibitors. Serpins are large proteins with a fascinating mechanism of inhibition. In their native, inhibitory form, serpins are in a metastable state, presenting a flexible bait loop for the protease to bind and initiate proteolytic cleavage (Fig. 3B, left panel) (243). The cleavage of the scissile peptide bond, with formation of an acyl-enzyme intermediate, triggers the serpin to undergo a significant conformational change, incorporating the cleaved bait loop into a large β-sheet, and thereby stabilizing its structure (Fig. 3B, right panel) (243, 244). This dramatic conformational change disrupts the protein structure of the attached protease, leading to its permanent inactivation (244). Some examples of serpins that inhibit cancer-associated proteases include the neutrophil elastase inhibitor alpha-1 antitrypsin, the uPA inhibitor plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), and the thrombin inhibitor antithrombin.

S1 family members are also regulated by small protein domains known as canonical serine protease inhibitors. These inhibitors share a conserved conformation of their protease binding loop that is preconfigured for extremely tight binding to the active site of target proteases (245). The canonical loop binds in the protease active site as an ideal substrate (Fig. 3C) and may readily form an acyl-enzyme (246), but is hydrolyzed very slowly and resists dissociation from the protease, leading to re-ligation of the inhibitor peptide bond (247). Crystal structures of protease-bound intact and cleaved inhibitors, supplemented with molecular dynamics simulations, suggest that proteolysis of these canonical inhibitors is dramatically slowed by structural constraints that prevent essential substrate dynamics during proteolysis (248). Examples of canonical inhibitors include SPINK1, a trypsin inhibitor (249), and Kunitz protease inhibitor domains found in proteins like amyloid precursor protein (APP), amyloid precursor-like protein 2 (APLP2), tissue factor pathway inhibitor-1 and -2 (TFPI-1 and TFPI-2), all of which regulate proteases of the coagulation cascade (250, 251, 252, 253, 254), and hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor-1 and -2 (HAI-1 and HAI-2), that regulate the activity of hepatocyte growth factor activator (HGFA) and membrane-anchored serine proteases matriptase, prostasin, hepsin, and TMPRSS2 (255, 256, 257, 258).

Similar to TIMPs, serine protease inhibitors often have pleiotropic functions, including protease-independent signaling activities. Their impact on cancer is complex; for example, PAI-1 and SPINK1 are associated with poor prognosis and may drive cancer progression (259, 260). Importantly, the loss of regulation by endogenous serine protease inhibitors can lead to excess proteolytic activity, promoting cancer. For example, HAI-2 is considered a tumor suppressor, and its loss of expression in cancers including prostate cancer and renal cell carcinoma is linked to tumor progression via the dysregulated activity of target proteases (258, 261, 262, 263).

Cysteine cathepsins are also regulated by endogenous protease inhibitors, mainly the cystatin superfamily in humans. This family includes intracellular stefins, secreted cystatins, and cystatin-like domains within kininogens (142). The cystatin fold, somewhat similar to TIMPs, has an extended binding epitope formed by the N-terminal segment and two β-hairpin loops, which collectively block the active site cleft of the protease (Fig. 3D) (264). The N-terminal segment occupies the nonprimed side, including the hydrophobic S2 subsite, while the first loop fills the S1ʹ site and the second loop occupies further removed subsites on the primed side. The inhibition of cathepsin B by cystatins involves a two-step mechanism, starting with the formation of an initial encounter complex, followed by conformational changes leading to the stable complex (265, 266). These kinetics can be explained by the structural shifts required of the cathepsin B occluding loop to open the primed side of the cleft for inhibitor binding (264).

Similar to other protein protease inhibitors, cystatins have roles beyond protease inhibition, including both tumor-promoting and tumor-suppressing activities (267). In many tumor types, reduced expression of cystatins or a lower ratio of cystatins to cathepsins is associated with poor prognosis, suggesting a protective role through inhibition of extracellular cathepsin activity (267). Experimental studies support this idea; for example, in the RIP1-Tag2 transgenic mouse model of pancreatic islet cell tumorigenesis, knockout of cystatin C resulted in larger tumors and increased tumor angiogenesis, linked to increased activity of cathepsins and to the cathepsin-mediated degradation of collagen-derived anti-angiogenic peptides (155).

The natural endogenous inhibitors of metalloproteases, serine proteases, and cysteine proteases can themselves serve as substrates for proteases that they are not designed to inhibit. This phenomenon is a significant mechanism through which different proteases exert mutual regulation. This indirect regulation is so widespread that a systems biology analysis of the human protease web identified endogenous protease inhibitors as central to network connectivity (223). Inhibitors often function as critical nodes, enabling different classes of proteases to regulate each other, as further explored in the sub-section, “Regulation of other enzymes within the protease web – activation of zymogens, degradation of inhibitors”.

Regulation via localization and complex formation

Control of subcellular location is another critical aspect of protease control. This involves interactions of proteases with proteins, lipids, and carbohydrate structures. Membrane trafficking and protein complex formation help localize extracellular proteases to specific sites, directing their proteolytic activity toward specific substrates. A key example is the concentration of proteases to the cell surface of tumor cells within dynamic actin-based membrane structures known as invadopodia. These structures enable tumor cells to efficiently utilize protease activity for the directed degradation of ECM proteins to clear a path for cellular invasion. Proteases are trafficked to invadopodia via vesicular transport along microtubules, a process driven by motor proteins and tightly regulated by accessory proteins (268). This process is well-characterized for MT1-MMP, a key enzyme in ECM degradation by invadopodia. MT1-MMP and other membrane-type MMPs at invadopodia are indispensable for the ability of invasive breast cancer cells to penetrate the intact, covalently crosslinked basement membrane (23). In the confined environment of 3D crosslinked collagen, when cell migration is restricted by the size and stiffness of the cell nucleus, MT1-MMP is specifically localized to the cancer cell surface in front of the nucleus. Here, invadopodia form to digest confining collagen fibrils (269). These invadopodia can form ring-like structures ahead of the nucleus, encircling the invasive cellular protrusion and expanding over time as MT1-MMP degrades collagen fibers to enlarge the matrix pore (270). Additionally, alternative trafficking patterns in tumor cells can localize MT1-MMP to regions of high plasma membrane blebbing. From these areas, MT1-MMP-rich tumor-derived microvesicles are released. The proteolytic activity of these vesicles is also crucial for individual amoeboid cell invasion through dense crosslinked collagen matrices (271).

Pericellular proteolysis employs both proteases with transmembrane anchors, such as membrane-type MMPs, ADAMs, and TTSPs, and a variety of soluble, secreted proteases. These soluble proteases can be localized to the membrane through a variety of binding partners. Soluble proteases of multiple classes (like MMP-2, MMP-9, uPA, cathepsin C) can be trafficked to invadopodia (272, 273, 274) and secreted at targeted degradation sites, or retained on the cell surface by receptor proteins. Both soluble and transmembrane proteases interact with specific integrins, tetraspanins, and other cell-surface receptors that regulate their trafficking and localization at specific points on the cell surface (275). For example, the six members of the TspanC8 family regulate the trafficking and localization of ADAM-10, influencing its activity toward different specific substrates (276, 277, 278). Similarly, the trafficking, activation, and proteolytic activity of ADAM-17 toward different substrates are influenced by its colocalization and interaction with membrane proteins like iRhom-1 and iRhom-2 (279, 280, 281), and several members of the Tspan8 family (282). Soluble MMP-9 can be localized on the surface of cancer cells by binding to the hyaluronan receptor CD44 and α4β1 integrin (283, 284, 285). uPA is localized by its receptor uPAR (273), and procathepsin B is localized by the annexin II tetramer on the surface of tumor cells (286).

In some cases, the localization of soluble proteases to the cell membrane may be mediated directly by interactions with lipid bilayer components (287). For example, MMP-7 binds to cell surface cholesterol sulfate and partially inserts into the membrane, triggering conformational changes that may lead to allosteric activation, and targeting proteolytic activity toward specific cell-surface proteins and ECM components (288, 289, 290). Furthermore, the trafficking and localization of proteases can be dramatically altered in the cancer setting, as in the case of cathepsin C and cathepsin D, typically lysosomal enzymes, which become redistributed to the cell surface and secreted in many types of cancer cells (233, 291).

Dimerization and oligomerization can also regulate protease function. An example of this is seen with MT1-MMP, as discussed earlier in the section “Maintenance of latency and proteolytic activation.” MT1-MMP forms dimers that function as receptor/activator complexes with TIMP-2 for activating proMMP-2 (224, 225). Evidence also suggests that MT1-MMP dimerization may enhance its collagenase activity (292). During the invasion of fibrosarcoma cells through 3D collagen matrices, MT1-MMP homodimers are uniquely formed at the leading edge of the invading cells (293), indicating that dimerization possibly regulates cellular invasion. In contrast, ADAM-17 forms homodimers in breast cancer cells, but this dimerization negatively regulates its sheddase activity. The dimeric form is preferentially inhibited by TIMP-3, while signaling pathways that stimulate ADAM-17 sheddase activity, releasing transforming growth factor–α, do so by shifting the monomer-dimer equilibrium toward the active monomeric species (294). MMP-9, which can exist as both monomers and homotrimers (295), also demonstrates how oligomerization affects protease activity. The trimeric form of proMMP-9 has a higher affinity for TIMP-1 than does monomeric proMMP-9, restricting its activation (295). However, trimeric active MMP-9 is less effectively inhibited by alpha2-macroglobulin, a broad-spectrum inhibitor of multiple proteolytic classes (296). Thus, dimerization and oligomerization serve as levers to modulate protease activity via multiple mechanisms.

Another mechanism by which proteases in the tumor microenvironment can be localized and brought into contact with their substrates is via neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). During inflammation, neutrophils extrude their decondensed chromatin from the nucleus to form these net-like structures. NETs are decorated with neutrophil proteases such as MMP-9, cathepsin G, and neutrophil elastase, and serve to entangle and neutralize pathogens. However, when inflammatory conditions overlap with cancer, NETs can capture and activate circulating dormant tumor cells, thereby promoting cancer metastasis and recurrence (108, 297). The role of proteases attached to NETs is significant in this process. For example, NET-associated MMP-9 and neutrophil elastase have been shown to sequentially cleave laminin-111, exposing a neoepitope that activates tumor cell oncogenic signaling through binding to integrin α3β1 (108). NET DNA acts as a scaffold in this context, preferentially binding to the laminin over other ECM molecules to colocalize this substrate with the proteases at sites of digestion, thereby enhancing their catalytic activity and impact on tumor progression.

Substrates in the tumor microenvironment—extracellular protease actions at the scene of the crime

In the tumor microenvironment, proteases play a pivotal role at the molecular level through the recognition and cleavage of specific protein substrates (key proteases and substrates summarized in Table 1). The extracellular space around a developing tumor exposes proteases to a diverse array of potential substrates. These include protein components of the ECM, soluble proteins secreted by tumor and stromal cells, and extracellular domains of transmembrane and membrane-associated proteins on the plasma membranes of these cells. Extracellular proteases significantly influence many aspects of tumor growth, progression, and metastasis by proteolyzing of numerous proteins within these substrate categories. Some of these actions leverage the broad degradative capabilities of proteases to dismantle barriers and forge pathways for the invasion of tumor cells. However, many critical tumor-promoting activities of extracellular proteases involve highly specific and limited proteolysis. This precision-targeted activity focuses on particular recognition and cleavage sites to activate latent signaling molecules or to directly initiate signaling pathways through proteolysis.

Degradation and remodeling of the extracellular matrix

The extracellular matrix (ECM), composed of around 300 unique proteins, proteoglycans, and glycoproteins, is organized into two primary forms: the porous interstitial matrix, which connects cells in the stroma, and the dense, sheet-like basement membrane, which underlies epithelial and endothelial cell sheets and delineates tissue compartments (298). Tumor cells, immune cells, fibroblasts, and other cells in the tumor microenvironment produce extracellular proteases that reshape and remodel the ECM, facilitating tumor initiation, growth, and progression through the cleavage of a multitude of ECM proteins and glycoproteins (298).

One of the best-appreciated proteolytic functions in cancer is the degradation of the basement membrane, enabling tumor cells to invade into stromal tissue, a key phenomenon that marks the progression to malignancy. Basement membranes primarily consist of covalently crosslinked nonfibrillar collagen IV intertwined with a network of polymeric laminin (298). The disruption of this barrier initially involves specialized collagenases, notably membrane-associated MMPs MT1-MMP, MT2-MMP, and MT3-MMP (23, 299, 300). Additional proteases, including uPA, plasmin, and the gelatinases MMP-2 and MMP-9, further degrade the basement membrane by cleaving collagen fragments and other matrix components, and/or by activating other protease zymogens (25, 26). Cysteine cathepsins also play a role, particularly during angiogenesis. For instance, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) upregulates cathepsins B, S, and L in pericytes, leading to the degradation of the vascular basement membrane of precursor venules, which then expand into larger vessels in a mouse model simulating the earliest stages of tumor angiogenesis (148).

Once tumor cells invade the stroma, passage through the dense interstitial matrix requires cleavage of fibrillar collagens types I, II, and III. This process requires the action of collagenases, which include MMP-1, MMP-8, MMP-13, MT1-MMP, MT3-MMP, and cathepsin K (301). While these collagenases exhibit some functional redundancy (24), they can produce distinct cleaved fibril morphologies and differentially cleave other ECM substrates, leading to unique cellular interactions with ECM and diverse functional outcomes (302). Importantly, experiments with fibroblasts and tumor cells have shown that the specific involvement of MT1-MMP in collagenolysis is essential for cellular invasion through 3D fibrillar collagen matrices (22, 24). This critical role in linking collagen degradation with directional motility is made possible by the regulated trafficking and spatial localization of MT1-MMP to dynamic actin-based invadopodia on the leading edge of invasive cells, as previously detailed in the section “Regulation via localization and complex formation”.

Beyond collagen, the degradation of other protein components of ECM is also crucial for tumor growth, progression, and metastasis. For example, the degradation of laminin-111 by MMP-9 disrupts the apicobasal polarity of breast cells, fostering invasive growth in 3D cultures (303). Furthermore, mammary tumor xenografts with reduced MMP-9 expression exhibited higher laminin-111 levels, coinciding with suppression of tumor growth; this finding highlights the importance of laminin-111 as a functional MMP-9 substrate in vivo (303). Another key basement membrane component, Laminin-332, which anchors epithelial cells via integrins at hemidesmosomes, can be cleaved by the S1 family TTSP hepsin (304, 305). This cleavage disrupts apicobasal polarity in mammary organoids and accelerates tumor formation in a myc-dependent mammary tumorigenesis model, pointing to the relevance of laminin-332 degradation in tumorigenesis (305). In prostate cancer models, the TTSP TMPRSS2 degrades nidogen-1, a basement membrane glycoprotein that cross-links collagen IV and laminin. This degradation facilitates prostate cancer cell invasion and metastasis (306).

Thrombospondin-1, with anti-angiogenic and anti-metastatic properties, is another critical ECM substrate (307, 308). In lung inflammation models, neutrophil-secreted serine proteases neutrophil elastase and cathepsin G degrade thrombospondin in the mouse lung microenvironment, leading to increased lung metastasis of melanoma (107). Mice lacking neutrophil elastase and cathepsin G in bone marrow cells showed preservation of thrombospondin-1 and reduced metastasis, emphasizing these proteases’ role in preparing the lung metastatic niche.

Protease action on ECM proteins can also involve limited proteolysis to reveal cryptic epitopes that mediate new functions. Proteases capable of cleaving laminin-332, including MMP-2, MT1-MMP, and TTSPs hepsin and matriptase, generate fragments that enhance cancer cell migration (304, 309, 310, 311). Neutrophil elastase and MMP-9, both associated with NETs in lung inflammation, sequentially cleave laminin-111 to expose a cryptic epitope recognized by α3β1 integrin on dormant breast cancer cells (108). This integrin activation triggers oncogenic signaling, awakening the cancer cells from dormancy and promoting metastatic lesion growth. An antibody targeting this laminin-111 cryptic epitope effectively blocked NET-induced β1 integrin activation, inhibiting the reactivation of dormant breast cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo (108).

Another cryptic epitope is crucial in the aggressive invasion of gliomas. The central nervous system possesses a unique ECM composed of hyaluronic acid and associated glycoproteins and proteoglycans including brevican, a neural-specific proteoglycan that is highly upregulated in gliomas. M12 family proteases ADAMTS-4 and ADAMTS-5 cleave brevican to expose a cryptic epitope that promotes glioma cell adhesion, motility, and invasion into the brain, in part through binding to tumor cell surface fibronectin (42, 43, 44).

Limited proteolysis of ECM proteins can also generate soluble bioactive fragments, known as matrikines, with novel functions. One example is the processing of laminin-332 by MMPs, which not only facilitates cellular invasion but also releases a soluble domain from the laminin-332 γ2 chain. This domain, containing several EGF-like repeats, has been found to interact with EGFR, activating signaling pathways that enhance cell motility (312). Additionally, cathepsin S cleaves laminin-332 in a mouse model of pancreatic tumorigenesis to produce pro-angiogenic fragments of the γ2 chain (155). This model also demonstrated the ability of cathepsin S to cleave and deactivate several anti-angiogenic matrikines derived from collagen IV. Cathepsin S knockout impaired tumor angiogenesis in this model, demonstrating the importance of this protease in stimulating tumor progression through the regulation of matrikines (155).

While intact thrombospondin-1 exhibits anti-angiogenic and anti-metastatic properties, its proteolytic processing releases a variety of matrikines with divergent activities (313). Many proteases can release thrombospondin fragments containing an N-terminal heparin-binding domain (313), which are powerful stimulators of angiogenesis (314, 315). MT1-MMP production of thrombospondin-1 matrikines is crucial for intussusceptive angiogenesis, a microvasculature expansion observed in development, inflammatory diseases, and certain cancers (316). In a mouse model of inflammatory colitis, endothelial cell-derived MT1-MMP cleaved thrombospondin-1, releasing a 50 kDa N-terminal fragment and a larger C-terminal fragment. These fragments signal through CD47 and αvβ3 integrin, promoting nitric oxide production and pathological intussusceptive remodeling (316). These examples highlight how proteolytically derived fragments from ECM molecules can signal and influence cancer progression.

Release, activation, and inactivation of soluble signaling molecules

The ECM serves as a reservoir for many soluble growth factors and signaling molecules, which remain sequestered when bound to matrix proteins, glycoproteins, and proteoglycans. Their release often depends upon the action of proteases and/or glycosidases. A key example is the regulation of transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ), a multifunctional cytokine. While TGFβ suppresses the growth of early neoplastic lesions, it also contributes to metastasis, angiogenesis, and suppression of anti-cancer immune responses in later cancer stages. Latent TGFβ, largely sequestered within the ECM, is tightly bound to a latency-associated peptide (LAP) that is linked via disulfide bonds to a latent TGFβ binding protein (LTBP). LTBPs attach to matrix components like fibronectin, fibrillin-1, and heparan sulfate, and can become crosslinked into the ECM (317). TGFβ activation involves its dissociation from LAP, which is initiated by integrin binding of the latent complex (317). A number of extracellular proteases, including plasmin, neutrophil elastase, mast cell chymase, MMP-2, MMP-9, and MT1-MMP, can enhance TGFβ activation and bioavailability in different tissues by cleaving LAP, LTBPs, or other matrix proteins (318). For example, MMP-9, when bound to CD44 on the cell surface of mouse mammary carcinoma cells, promotes cellular invasion and angiogenesis by activating latent TGFβ, likely through direct cleavage of LAP (319). Activated osteoclasts, which play a role in bone destruction during bone metastasis, can mobilize and activate TGFβ from bone ECM by cleaving LTBP-1 with MMPs and serine proteases (320). Similarly, activated endothelial cells release latent TGF-β complexes from the subendothelial matrix by cleaving LTBP-1, with MT1-MMP identified as the responsible protease (321). Additionally, the TTSP hepsin, frequently overexpressed on breast and prostate cancer cells, stimulates TGFβ signaling by degrading fibronectin, thus freeing latent TGFβ from the ECM (322).

VEGF, a major regulator of pathological angiogenesis in cancer, is regulated via sequestration in the ECM, binding to heparan sulfate proteoglycans. MMPs or plasmin can release active VEGF fragments, enabling them to bind to VEGF receptors on endothelial cells and stimulate angiogenesis (323, 324). MMP-9 proteolysis is critical for VEGF mobilization in several models of tumorigenesis. For example, MMP-9 secreted by infiltrating neutrophils triggers the angiogenic switch in a pancreatic carcinogenesis model (238, 325), while in cervical carcinogenesis, MMP-9 from macrophages plays a similar role (326). Fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2), also sequestered in the ECM by heparan sulfate proteoglycans, influences tumor growth and angiogenesis (327, 328). In cell culture models, FGF-2 can be proteolytically released by plasminogen activators and plasmin, stimulating endothelial cell growth (327); breast cancer cells can also release FGF-2 via cathepsin D (184). Moreover, thrombin can cleave high molecular weight isoforms of FGF-2 to create a lower molecular weight variant with enhanced ability to stimulate endothelial cell migration and proliferation (329). These instances are just a few examples of the many growth factors within the ECM, whose bioavailability is modulated by extracellular proteases in the tumor microenvironment.

Extracellular proteases also regulate the activation and inactivation of many soluble signaling molecules, significantly impacting cancer growth, progression, and interaction with the immune system. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and macrophage-stimulating protein (MSP) are examples of growth factors activated by proteases. These secreted proteins are initially produced as inactive precursors and require cleavage to generate the active signaling heterodimer, where the α and β chains remain connected via a disulfide bond (330). Both HGF and MSP are non-proteolytic homologs within the S1 serine protease family that lack catalytic activity due to mutations of catalytic residues. Their activation as signaling proteins involves cleavage at the same site responsible for zymogen activation in other S1 family proteases. This cleavage induces similar conformational changes and structure stabilization in the pseudoprotease domain (330), as described above for active S1 proteases in the section “Maintenance of latency and proteolytic activation”. The conformational change enables activated HGF or MSP to bind to and promote dimerization of their respective receptor tyrosine kinases, MET and RON, initiating cell signaling that can drive malignant transformation and cancer progression (331, 332). The TTSP matriptase is a critical activator of HGF, shown to promote c-MET mediated carcinogenesis and cancer progression in mouse models of breast cancer and skin squamous cell carcinoma (97, 98, 99, 100, 102). Similarly, the TTSP TMPRSS2, highly expressed in metastatic prostate cancers, efficiently activates HGF, contributing to prostate cancer metastasis through c-MET signaling in a mouse model (101). TTSPs matriptase and hepsin have also been implicated as pathologically relevant activators of MSP, mediating signaling through RON (333, 334).

Platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) are another family of growth factors pivotal in cancer development and progression. PDGF-C and PDGF-D are secreted as latent homodimers, requiring proteolytic removal of an N-terminal domain to activate the growth factor domain dimers that signal through α-PDGFR and β-PDGFR, respectively (335, 336). Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) has been identified as the primary activator of PDGF-C in fibroblasts (337), while tPA, uPA, and matriptase contribute to PDGF-C activation in ER-positive breast cancer cells (338). Recent mouse model studies of ER-positive breast cancer demonstrate that low levels of PDGF-C signaling in the lung microenvironment of young mice support the survival of dormant disseminated tumor cells. In contrast, increased PDGF-C and its activator tPA in the lungs of aged mice promote metastatic outgrowth of these tumor cells (339). A similar age-related upregulation of PDGF-C and tPA is observed in human lung tissues, potentially explaining the extended latency of dormant disseminated ER+ breast cancer cells and the significant risk of late metastatic recurrence (339). PDGF-D signaling is linked to prostate cancer progression and recurrence, with uPA and matriptase identified as the key activating proteases (340, 341).

Many chemokines undergo proteolysis, where N-terminal truncation can activate or inactivate them depending on the chemokine and cleavage site, leading to complex biological outcomes in cancer. For example, neutrophil attractant CXC chemokine interleukin-8 (IL-8) is activated through processing by MMP-9, plasmin, or thrombin. In a positive feedback loop, neutrophil-produced MMP-9 removes the N-terminal 6 residues from IL-8, increasing its affinity for the receptor CXCR1 and its potency for neutrophil activation by 10- to 27-fold (342). Proteolytic activation of IL-8 is of importance in the tumor microenvironment, since IL-8 is secreted by many tumor cells and signals through CXCR1 on cancer cells, endothelial cells, neutrophils and tumor-associated macrophages, stimulating multiple aspects of cancer progression (343). Conversely, an example of inactivating cleavage involves the processing of CXCL10 and CXCL11 by DPP IV, which removes their N-terminal dipeptide, converting these CXCR3 agonists into antagonists and reducing their chemotactic potency by more than 10-fold (114). CXCL10 is crucial in tumor immunity and immunotherapy responses, while its inactivation by DPP IV creates a tumor-permissive environment; inhibiting DPP IV has been shown to improve tumor immunity and immunotherapy in mouse models of hepatocellular carcinoma and melanoma (115, 116).

Several signaling molecules are initially expressed in latent form as membrane proteins on the cell surface, requiring proteolysis for the release of the soluble, active ligands. Prominent examples include the members of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) family, type I membrane proteins that upon cleavage by cell surface proteases release an extracellular ectodomain that functions as a soluble growth factor and ligand for the EGF receptor (EGFR) family of receptor tyrosine kinases (344). Some of the EGF family members for which ectodomain shedding mediates protumorigenic activities in cancer include EGF, transforming growth factor alpha (TGF-α), heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF), and amphiregulin. The primary sheddases responsible for release of these growth factors are members of the ADAM family, in which ADAM-10 is the major sheddase of EGF, while ADAM-17 is the major sheddase of TGF-α, HB-EGF, and amphiregulin (36). ADAM-17 cleavage of TGF-α is crucial for activation of EGFR by this growth factor and is essential for tumor development in a mouse model of TGF-α-dependent tumorigenesis (35).

EGF-like growth factors shed from the surface of tumor cells also mediate paracrine signaling to stromal cells, promoting tumor growth. A recent study investigating how tumor cells influence tumor-associated macrophages, leading to their acquisition of protumorigenic characteristics, revealed that this process is driven by HB-EGF and amphiregulin shedding from tumor cells through ADAM-17. These growth factors then signal through EGFR on macrophages (345). Other proteases are also involved in EGF-like ligand shedding in different cancer-relevant settings. For example, MMP-7 can release HB-EGF from murine mammary epithelial cells, triggering autocrine signaling through the ErbB4 receptor and leading to malignant transformation (346). Additionally, studies using a breast cancer to bone metastasis model implicated MMP-1 and ADAMTS-1, secreted by breast cancer cells, as the proteases responsible for shedding TGF-α, HB-EGF, and amphiregulin. These ligands then activate EGFR signaling in bone stromal cells, facilitating bone metastasis (45).

Receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa B ligand (RANKL) is another membrane protein that, when cleaved, releases a soluble ectodomain mediating signaling activities. In bone, osteoblasts produce RANKL, which then signals through its receptor RANK on osteoclasts and their precursors to promote osteoclast differentiation and activation. In bone stromal cells and primary osteoblasts, ADAM-10 or MT1-MMP can shed RANKL, releasing the soluble ectodomain (38). In the context of cancer, the interaction between tumor cells and bone stroma disrupts bone homeostatic processes. For instance, metastatic prostate cancer cells induce osteoblasts to upregulate RANKL, activating osteoclasts. These activated osteoclasts then secrete MMP-7 at the tumor-bone interface. In a positive feedback loop, MMP-7 has been shown to shed soluble active RANKL, further driving osteoclast activation and osteolysis at the tumor-bone interface in a rat model (347). A similar phenomenon is observed in breast cancer bone metastasis mouse models, where cathepsin G secreted by osteoclasts acts as a sheddase of RANKL, contributing to further osteoclast activation and mammary tumor-induced osteolysis (110). Tumor cells can also express the RANKL/RANK system, and shedding of soluble RANKL can mediate oncogenic signaling pathways. For example, RANKL shed from prostate cancer cells by MT1-MMP was shown to initiate an autocrine signaling loop leading to enhanced tumor cell migration (348). These examples highlight the multifaceted role of RANKL shedding in cancer progression, particularly in the context of bone metastasis.

Cleavage of transmembrane proteins

Protease cleavage of cell membrane proteins contributes to tumorigenesis and tumor progression beyond merely shedding soluble signaling molecules. Protease-activated receptors (PARs) are a critical group of protease substrates in cancer. This family of 4 G protein-coupled receptors is activated by proteolysis of their extracellular N-terminal domain. Cleavage at a specific site within this domain exposes a cryptic epitope at the new N-terminus, which acts as a tethered ligand that docks with a binding site comprised of extracellular loops of the receptor, triggering transmembrane signaling (65, 349). PAR1, PAR3, and PAR4 are typically activated by thrombin, although various other proteases can cleave and activate the PARs in different physiological and pathological settings, sometimes targeting noncanonical cleavage sites, leading to biased agonism with distinct signaling consequences (349).

PAR1 is widely upregulated in human cancers, and protease signaling through PAR1 contributes to tumorigenesis, cancer growth, motility, invasion, metastasis, and angiogenesis. Early investigations found that melanoma cells could activate thrombin, which signaled through PAR1 to stimulate proliferation and enhance experimental metastasis (63); this mechanism and its impact on metastasis have been corroborated in multiple other tumor cell types (64). More recent studies using a genetically engineered mouse model of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma showed that thrombin-PAR1 signaling in tumor cells mediates immune evasion mechanisms and fosters an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (60, 350). In mouse models of colon adenocarcinoma, thrombin-dependent tumor growth was reduced when PAR1-expressing tumor cells were implanted into PAR1-deficient mice, revealing that thrombin-PAR1 signaling in stromal cells also contributes to tumor growth (59). In mouse models of osteolytic breast cancer metastasis to bone, PAR1 signaling in monocyte osteoclast precursors was found to drive chemotaxis, increasing osteoclast precursors and mature osteoclasts at the tumor-bone interface (111), with cathepsin G, upregulated at the tumor-bone interface in both tumor cells and monocytes, mediating this process (111). Additionally, PAR1 activation is not limited to serine proteases; MMP-1 can activate PAR1 via cleavage at a noncanonical site, initiating a distinct downstream signaling profile (351). In mouse models of breast cancer, MMP-1 derived from stromal fibroblasts was shown to activate tumor cell PAR1, promoting tumor growth and invasion (70).

PAR2 is also frequently upregulated in human cancers, playing a significant role in inflammatory signaling and contributing to tumorigenesis, cancer growth, motility, invasion, metastasis, and angiogenesis (349, 352). Typically activated by trypsin, PAR2 can also be activated by other proteases in different biological contexts. Tumor-associated trypsin, highly expressed by colon, pancreatic, and ovarian cancer cells, activates PAR2 signaling, stimulating mitogenic pathways and cell proliferation (75, 76, 353, 354). The trypsin isoform PRSS3/mesotrypsin is also implicated in PAR2 signaling, leading to tumor cell proliferation and survival in esophageal adenocarcinoma (81). Beyond trypsins, the TTSP matriptase is a significant direct mediator of PAR2 signaling, cleaving at the canonical site (103, 352, 355). In skin squamous cell carcinogenesis models, matriptase signaling through PAR2 on keratinocyte stem cells induces pro-inflammatory and pro-tumorigenic effects essential for the progression of pre-malignant cells to malignancy (106). In normal skin, PAR2 colocalizes with matriptase, which is largely found in complexes with inhibitor HAI-1. However, in squamous cell carcinoma, HAI-1 downregulation leads to active matriptase, potentially enhancing PAR2 signaling (356). The matriptase/HAI-1 ratio is also important in ovarian cancer, where low HAI-1 and high matriptase correlate with metastasis. Recent studies in ovarian cancer models show that matriptase-activated PAR2 signaling disrupts cell-cell adhesion, aiding the dissemination of ovarian cancer spheroids and increasing metastasis (357). Intriguingly, the role of matriptase in PAR2 signaling extends beyond autocrine stimulation of tumor cells. When deregulated by HAI-1 silencing, soluble active matriptase shed from oral squamous cell carcinoma cells can transactivate fibroblast PAR2, enhancing fibroblast migration (358). The link between cancer-associated fibroblast expression of PAR2, invasive tumor histology, and poor patient outcomes suggests that this soluble matriptase-PAR2 paracrine signaling axis contributes to oral squamous cell carcinoma progression (358).

Other proteases, such as KLKs, are also involved in PAR signaling in cancer. In prostate cancer, KLKs like KLK2 and KLK4, highly expressed by cancer cells, signal through PAR2, and KLK4 additionally signals through PAR1, stimulating proliferation (93, 94). KLK4 secreted by prostate cancer cells can signal through PAR1 expressed on stromal fibroblasts, inducing cytokine release from activated fibroblasts, which in turn stimulates mitogenic signaling in cancer cells, driving tumor growth (95).

Protease cleavage can also modulate the activities of other types of membrane receptors. For example, EphA2, a receptor tyrosine kinase that binds to membrane-bound ephrin ligands on adjacent cells, regulates several processes essential for the maintenance of epithelial architecture. In breast and ovarian cancer cells, EphA2 is overexpressed and constitutively cleaved by MT1-MMP on the cell surface, releasing an N-terminal fragment (359, 360). This proteolysis of EphA2 by MT1-MMP disrupts its capacity for ligand-dependent signaling and instead promotes ligand-independent signaling. This transformation converts EphA2 from a tumor suppressor into an oncoprotein, enhancing malignant growth, cell migration and single-cell invasion (359, 360).

CUB domain-containing protein 1 (CDCP1) is another transmembrane receptor overexpressed in many carcinomas. CDCP1 initiates oncogenic signaling upon phosphorylation of its intracellular domain and complex formation with kinases Src and PKCδ. However, these processes only begin after the extracellular domain is cleaved by serine proteases at a specific pair of sites (361, 362, 363). Protease cleavage of CDCP1 enhances cell survival, migration, dissemination, and metastatic colonization in prostate and breast cancer models (364, 365, 366). Plasmin and uPA are primarily implicated as the activators of CDCP1 signaling in vivo. In an experimental metastasis model, wild-type mice exhibited CDCP1 cleavage in lung tissue, leading to signaling pathway activation and robust colonization by human cells. Conversely, plasminogen-knockout mice showed intact CDCP1, with abrogation of signaling and greatly reduced lung colonization. These effects were reversed by administration of physiological levels of purified plasmin (364). A recent study employed activity-based probes mimicking the CDCP1 cleavage site to trap candidate proteases in pancreatic cancer cell cultures, identifying tumor cell-produced uPA and bovine plasmin from the culture medium (367). Furthermore, knocking down uPA in pancreatic, prostate, and ovarian cancer cell lines prevented CDCP1 cleavage, suggesting that uPA is a major in vivo regulator of CDCP1, both through direct cleavage and by activating plasminogen to plasmin (367).

Adhesion proteins are another category of cell membrane proteins targeted by proteases to mediate tumor promoting effects. One well-documented example is E-cadherin, which mediates cell-cell adhesion at adherens junctions of epithelial cells through homodimerization between neighboring cells. These contacts are critical for maintaining epithelial architecture, and proteolytic targeting of the extracellular component of E-cadherin can trigger epithelial-mesenchymal transition and promote cell migration and invasion (29, 30). The released extracellular fragment of E-cadherin also contributes to these protumorigenic effects, both through interference with the cell-cell junctions of other cells, and via signaling through ErbB receptors (30, 32, 368). Extracellular proteases implicated in E-cadherin cleavage and associated tumorigenic processes include ADAM10, ADAM15, MMP-3, MMP-7, MMP-9, and the cysteine cathepsins B, L, and S (29, 30, 31, 32, 37, 152, 357, 368). KLKs 6 and 7 have also been implicated, although for KLK6 the shedding of E-cadherin appears to be indirect, via activation of ADAM10 (89, 369).

Other members of the cadherin superfamily have been implicated as protease substrates in cancer, including desmoglein-1 and -2, which mediate cell-cell adhesion at desmosomes of epithelial cells. Ectodomain shedding of desmoglein-1 by KLK5 and desmoglein-2 by ADAM-17 contributes to loss of cell cohesion in oral squamous cell carcinoma models (39, 90). Matriptase was found to cleave desmoglein-2 in colon cancer cells (370), and KLK7 cleaves desmoglein-2 in pancreatic cancer cells (91). Junctional adhesion molecules (JAMs), members of the immunoglobulin superfamily, also represent proteins involved in cell-cell adhesion that are potential targets of extracellular proteases. JAM-B, highly expressed in human brain microvascular endothelial cells, is essential for cell-cell adhesion at tight junctions to maintain barrier function. Cathepsin S specifically mediates metastatic breast cancer cell transmigration across the blood–brain barrier in brain metastasis models by cleaving the JAM-B extracellular domain, disrupting tight junction integrity (153).

Regulation of other enzymes within the protease web—activation of zymogens, degradation of inhibitors

The intricate network of proteases and their proteinaceous inhibitors, spanning multiple classes and families, form a complex “protease web,” where proteases often regulate each other’s activity through activating or inactivating cleavage events (223). Proteolytic activation of protease zymogens is a common theme, as highlighted earlier in the section, “Maintenance of latency and proteolytic activation”. Classic examples include the protease activation cascades leading to thrombin activation and the activation of plasmin by plasminogen activators tPA and uPA. In cancer, the upregulation of diverse proteases, along with changes in their trafficking and localization, can perturb the protease web resulting in activation of protease zymogens by nonphysiological activators. Activation cascades in the tumor microenvironment often involve proteases from different classes and families. For example, a cascade featuring sequential activation of uPA, plasmin, MMP-3, and MMP-9 enhances breast carcinoma cell invasion (371). Similarly, cascades involving uPA or tPA activation of plasmin, which in turn activates MMPs, have likewise been implicated in collagen degradation and basement membrane invasion by many types of cancer cells (25, 26, 372).

Upstream mediators of uPA activation include the TTSPs matriptase and hepsin in ovarian and prostate cancer models, respectively (104, 105), and cell surface-associated cathepsin B in ovarian cancer cells (373). Matriptase and hepsin can autoactivate on the cell surface (213), and active matriptase can be further increased via activation by TMPRSS2 in prostate cancer cells (306). Cysteine cathepsin B secreted by colon cancer cells is activated by aspartic cathepsin D (185), while cathepsin D itself is activated by cathepsins B and L (187). Distinct protease activation cascades have been implicated in different metastatic niches; for example, the prometastatic activities of MMP-9 at the tumor-bone interface in metastatic breast cancer osteolytic lesions depend on proMMP-9 activation by cathepsin G from osteoclasts (109). Additionally, the proteolytic activation of enzymes in the tumor microenvironment extends beyond proteases. For example, heparanase, a glycoside hydrolase that promotes invasion and metastasis by cleaving heparan sulfate, is activated by cathepsin L secreted by tumor cells and fibroblasts (154).

The protease web encompasses not only proteases but also their endogenous proteinaceous inhibitors. These inhibitors can be substrates for other proteases that are not susceptible to inhibition (223). This inactivating cleavage of inhibitors by a non-targeted protease creates a pathway for indirectly upregulating the activity of one or multiple other proteases. For instance, TIMP-1 forms a complex with its physiological target proMMP-9 to limit activation; however, TIMP-1 within this complex can be preferentially inactivated upon cleavage by neutrophil elastase, rendering proMMP-9 vulnerable to activation by MMP-3 (374). The inactivating cleavage of TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 by cathepsin B can also contribute to enhanced MMP activity and increased MMP-dependent angiogenesis (375).

The cystatins are another family of inhibitors regulated by proteolysis. A proteomics approach for the discovery of MMP-2 substrates in the fibroblast secretome revealed multiple protease inhibitors among the novel substrates, including cystatin C. Notably, cystatin C cleavage by MMP-2 reduced its inhibitory potency towards cysteine cathepsin targets (376). Cystatin C is similarly cleaved by aspartic cathepsin D secreted by breast cancer cells, resulting in greatly increased activity of cathepsin B in the breast cancer cell secretome (186).

PRSS3/mesotrypsin is an isoform of trypsin that is not just resistant to inhibition by canonical serine protease inhibitors but can cleave these inhibitors, greatly diminishing their potency toward other target proteases (77, 82, 83, 377, 378). Protease inhibitors that are substrates of mesotrypsin include APPI, APLP2, TFPI-1, and TFPI-2, inhibitors of coagulation pathway serine proteases, along with HAI-2, an inhibitor of matriptase, hepsin, prostasin, and HGFA, and bikunin, an inhibitor of cell surface-bound plasmin (77, 82, 83). Mesotrypsin can thus act as a key node in the protease web, regulating through protease inhibitor cleavage the activity of a spectrum of serine proteases. These proteases in turn mediate growth factor activation, PAR signaling, and ECM degradation, contributing to mesotrypsin’s roles in tumor growth, progression, and metastasis (79, 80).

Identifying the villains and their modus operandi—an evolving forensic toolbox

To understand the role of a protease in cancer, it is crucial to identify the substrates it acts upon to produce pathogenic effects. No single research approach can definitively ascertain the specific substrates and cleavage events mediated by individual proteases while simultaneously demonstrating the biological and pathological significance of these events. Genetic knockout and overexpression mouse models have been critical for demonstrating the importance of some individual proteases in tumorigenesis and tumor progression. However, the complexity of the protease web in vivo often makes it difficult to attribute specific protein cleavages in these models to a single protease. In vitro studies using purified enzymes and protein substrates can reveal specific cleavage sites and kinetics, but cannot confirm whether these cleavage events occur in vivo or are significant drivers of disease. The most robust evidence implicating specific proteases, substrates, and their pathological mechanisms in cancer combines insights from multiple disciplines and approaches. Such a strategy might include identifying substrates through unbiased proteomics approaches, validating their relevance in cancer using in vivo models and analyses of patient tumors, and establishing direct cleavage relationships between enzymes and substrates via in vitro biochemical assays with purified proteins. The multitude of extracellular proteases involved in the protease web of cancer poses a significant challenge to clearly attributing specific cleavage events and understanding their mechanistic significance. However, evolving technologies in the areas of proteomics, probe development, and chemical biology are increasingly capable of addressing these challenges, helping to unravel protease-substrate relationships and accelerating progress in this field.

Substrate profiling and identification

One of the most effective and unbiased approaches for discovering protease substrates in biological systems comes from mass spectrometry-based degradomics (379). This specialized branch of proteomics seeks to identify and/or quantify proteolytic cleavage events across the proteome. Degradomics for substrate discovery typically involves comparing proteomes treated with a specific protease to untreated ones, or contrasting proteomes from models overexpressing or deficient in the protease with control models exhibiting native protease expression. The goal is to identify candidate substrates and cleavage sites that are differentially processed depending on the expression or activity of the protease. To increase the sensitivity of detecting peptides resulting from relevant cleavage events, several strategies focus on enriching the proteome sample for neo-termini created by these events (2, 379, 380). Common approaches involve chemically blocking all primary amines in the proteome samples, including both native and processed N-termini. This step incorporates an isotopic label or isobaric proteomics tag, enabling differential labeling of multiple samples for comparison. The samples then undergo digestion by trypsin or another digestive protease to produce peptides suitable for LC-MS analysis. Next, peptides with unlabeled N-termini are depleted, enriching for the labeled N-termini. Subsequent LC-MS analysis and assignment using specialized bioinformatics tools and databases enables the identification of the parent proteins showing differential cleavage between samples, indicating potential substrates, along with the specific sites of cleavage (2, 379, 380).

Three of the most common of these N-terminomics approaches, differing in their modification and enrichment chemistries, are terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS) (381), combined fractional diagonal chromatography (COFRADIC) (382), and enzymatic N-terminal labeling employing an engineered peptide ligase (383). These approaches have shed light on the substrate ensembles of a select number of extracellular proteases implicated in cancer progression. One of the most comprehensive studies reported to date employed TAILS with 8-plex iTRAQ labeling to profile the neo-N-termini in tumors from the Rip1-Tag2 pancreatic cancer model. This study compared tumors from mice with six different cysteine cathepsin knockout genotypes (149). The findings indicated that for these enzymes, overall degradation was more prevalent than limited proteolytic processing. A smaller group of putative substrates was identified as stable proteolytic products, which varied among the different cathepsin knockouts, indicating distinct, nonredundant functions of these enzymes.

Chemical biology offers innovative tools to enhance substrate identification, which is particularly useful for cell surface proteins which, despite their critical roles in cancer, are frequently underrepresented in mass spectrometry-based degradomics due to low abundance. To address this issue, cell surface N-terminomics introduces labeling and enrichment techniques specifically for the extracellular cell surface proteome. The approach employs an engineered peptide ligase, localized to the cell surface either through exogenous overexpression of a plasma membrane-targeted fusion protein (384) or chemical functionalization for covalent attachment to abundant cell surface glycans (385). This ligase enzymatically labels accessible free N-termini of cell surface proteins with a peptide ester containing biotin and an isotopic tag, enabling specific capture and analysis of N-terminal peptides in an MS-based proteomic workflow. This approach was used to examine broad alterations in cell surface proteolysis following the induction of single oncogenes in premalignant cells (385). Future analyses using protease knockout models might connect specific cleaved cell surface substrates to particular protease mediators in various cancer contexts. A different useful method for labeling surface glycans for proteomics is surface-spanning protein enrichment with click sugars (SUSPECS), which has been used for the identification of substrates of several sheddases, albeit not yet in cancer models (386, 387).

Another innovative chemical biology approach for substrate identification employs protease engineering through genetic code expansion, creating mechanism-based covalent traps that can capture and identify the natural protein substrates of specific proteases (388). By replacing the catalytic serine or cysteine nucleophile of a serine or cysteine protease with genetically encoded, photocaged 2,3-diaminopropionic acid, the modified enzyme, upon photoactivation, can form a stable acyl-enzyme adduct with the N-terminal substrate fragment. These enzyme-substrate adducts can then be isolated for substrate identification using an MS workflow (388). While not yet widely adopted, this method holds immense potential for identifying comprehensive substrate repertoires for the many extracellular serine and cysteine proteases implicated in cancer processes.

Candidate substrates identified through broad screening approaches require subsequent validation to confirm whether the protease-substrate relationship is direct. The presence of a cleavage fragment in the presence of the protease might be due to indirect proteolysis promotion, such as when the protease activates another protease responsible for the cleavage or inactivates an inhibitor of another protease. Traditionally, validation studies have tested direct cleavage using purified recombinant proteins with gel-based readouts. However, current strategies also incorporate mass spectrometry-based targeted proteomics experiments to detect and quantify fragments produced by the cleavage of a specific substrate (380).

Multiplexing of samples over a time course for time-resolved substrate degradomics can reduce false positives and provide insight into cleavage kinetics. This approach allows for subclassification and prioritization of candidate substrates based on their catalytic efficiency of cleavage (389). Once a substrate is validated as genuine, further mechanistic studies in biological models may be required to understand the significance of the proteolytic cleavage event in the cancer context. These steps are critical for unraveling the complex interactions within the protease web and their implications for cancer progression and treatment.

Probes and reagents for enzyme identification, detection, and disambiguation

In some studies, the goal is to identify the active proteases in specific cancer settings or to determine the proteases responsible for observed proteolytic activities in cancer. Since protease activity is regulated posttranslationally via zymogen latency and endogenous inhibitors, as detailed in the section, “The making of villains – posttranslational regulation and dysregulation of proteolytic activity”, simply monitoring protease abundance alone is misleading. Even quantification of the mature protease form is an insufficient proxy for activity, since mature proteases may be inactive due to inhibition. It is therefore necessary to directly detect or capture active proteases. Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) is a technique that fulfills this need by using probes that bind and covalently label active forms of proteases, enabling their isolation and identification by proteomics methods (390, 391). This method is particularly effective for the serine and cysteine protease families since their chemical mechanisms feature a reactive serine or cysteine nucleophile that readily undergoes covalent labeling by an electrophilic probe (391). Seminal studies have used broadly reactive probes to profile serine hydrolases, including proteases, in cell-based breast cancer models (392) and in cells derived from mammary tumor xenografts (393). These studies found that increased invasiveness and metastatic propensity were associated with increases in uPA and tPA activity. For labeling metalloproteases, covalent probes have been developed using photoreactive or spontaneously reactive variants of noncovalent inhibitors (391, 394, 395). However, these approaches have not yet been widely adopted, partly due to challenges in achieving uniform labeling efficiencies across different enzymes. This limitation arises because the proximity labeling depends upon the presence of a well-placed nucleophile on the enzyme (395, 396).

Activity-based probes with selectivity for specific families or subsets of proteases have been used to identify key proteases involved in cancer malignancy. For instance, a probe specific to the cysteine cathepsin family was used to image cathepsin activity in the RIP1-Tag2 pancreatic tumorigenesis model. Isolation of labeled enzymes from tissue lysates revealed increased activities of cathepsins B, C, L, and Z during tumor progression (397). A recent study used an activity-based probe designed to broadly label serine proteases with tryptic-like specificity (those cleaving after lysine or arginine), identifying uPA and tPA as active serine proteases that promote malignant properties of ovarian clear cell carcinoma cells (398). Sometimes research needs to answer more specific questions, such as identifying the protease responsible for cleaving a specific substrate in a particular setting. To identify the primary protease responsible for cleaving CDCP1 on the tumor cell surface, given previous indications of involvement of serine proteases with tryptic-like specificity, substrate-biased activity-based probes were specially designed to mimic the two known relevant cleavage sites within CDCP1 (367). These probes successfully captured and identified tumor cell-secreted uPA as the major protease responsible for CDCP1 cleavage and consequent promotion of pancreatic cancer metastasis.

Significant efforts have been invested in creating highly specific activity-based probes for imaging and functional analyses of individual proteases in culture and in vivo models (399). These probes can be valuable for distinguishing closely related enzymes that share similar expression patterns and substrate profiles. An example is in the development of activity-based probes capable of discriminating between the very similar TTSPs matriptase and hepsin (400). Often, probes with improved specificity are developed by screening combinatorial peptide libraries that incorporate both natural and noncanonical amino acids (401). Examples include the development of orthogonal probes designed to differentiate among the four human neutrophil serine proteases, particularly the closely similar neutrophil elastase and proteinase 3 (402, 403).

A general approach that shows great promise for the identification of highly selective activity-based probes for serine or cysteine hydrolases employs phage display of cyclized peptides, derivatized with an appropriate reactive electrophile, to screen large diversity libraries of candidate probe sequences (404). A different approach to address the challenge of closely similar active sites among homologous enzymes resorts to disambiguation through enzyme engineering. By mutating the target enzyme to contain an additional, noncatalytic cysteine nucleophile near the active site, an appropriately matched activity-based probe can be rendered exquisitely selective (405). Through the knock-in of the engineered enzyme into appropriate cancer cell models, the cognate probe could be used to selectively image and quantify the active protease during various cancer-related processes. Importantly, the utility of this approach need not be limited to serine or cysteine proteases but might also be extended to metalloproteases or aspartic proteases.

The development of sensitive and selective activity-based probes for various KLKs has enabled detailed studies of active KLK6 in pancreatic cancer cells (406) and the simultaneous orthogonal detection of active KLK2, KLK3, and KLK14 in prostate cancer culture models (407). In the realm of cysteine proteases, selective activity-based probes have been developed for cathepsins B and L, showing promise for the detection and localization of these active proteases in cancer cells, including primary tumor cells isolated from patient samples (408, 409). These developments highlight the growing precision and utility of activity-based probes in cancer research, enhancing our understanding of protease functions in malignancy.

For some applications, antibodies and other protein-based affinity reagents can offer an alternative to covalent activity-based probes, harnessing the potential for specificity that can be gained through the large and complementary interface of a protein–protein interaction. For example, an active-site-specific recombinant antibody was used to selectively image active matriptase on the cancer cell surface, both in cultured tumor cells and in mouse models (410). Protein affinity reagents have been pursued for MMPs, where the development of selective covalent affinity-based probes has proven elusive. Libraries of single-chain camelid antibodies, and human antibodies engineered with convex paratopes resembling camelid antibodies, have proven to be rich sources for inhibitory antibodies that can selectively target the accessible active sites of individual MMPs, including MMP-14 and MMP-10, with high affinity (411, 412). Alternatively, natural TIMPs can be used as scaffolds to develop high affinity and specificity reagents targeting the active sites of individual MMPs. Variants of the N-terminal domain of TIMP-2 that can selectively target active MMP-14 or MMP-9 in cancer cell cultures have been identified by screening combinatorial libraries using the yeast surface display platform (413, 414, 415). Similarly, yeast surface display of a full-length TIMP-1 library enabled the identification of an MMP-3-selective variant capable of fine discrimination between the highly conserved MMP-3 and MMP-10 (416). These recent successes suggest that TIMP and antibody engineering may offer paths toward an expanding toolbox of selective metalloprotease affinity reagents to probe the distinct functions of these extracellular enzymes in biological models.

In addition to detecting active enzymes, affinity reagents can selectively identify neo-epitopes generated by proteolytic cleavage within crucial substrates. Monoclonal antibodies that specifically recognize these neo-epitopes are invaluable tools to elucidate the impact of the cleavage events in biological systems. A notable instance of this approach was used to study the cleavage of laminin-111 by neutrophil elastase and MMP-9 in association with NETs as a trigger for dormant cancer cell reactivation (108). A monoclonal antibody raised against NET-remodeled laminin-111 uniquely identified cleaved, but not intact, laminin. This antibody helped show that sites of laminin remodeling were aligned with NETs, that the cleavage was dependent on the presence of both neutrophils and NETs, and that the cleaved laminin-111 colocalized with tumor cell clusters undergoing reawakening. Additionally, chimeric mouse antibodies targeting the neoepitope blocked dormant tumor cell reawakening in vitro and in mice, providing strong evidence for the direct role of NET-induced proteolytic laminin cleavage in cancer recurrence (108).

Beyond mechanistic investigations, antibodies recognizing neo-epitopes have potential as clinical biomarkers or for pharmacological targeting. For example, a recent study developed recombinant antibodies capable of recognizing a tumor-specific proteolytic neoepitope of CDCP1 without binding to the uncleaved form (417). These neoepitope-targeting antibodies were then used to direct the localization of antibody-drug conjugates in a pancreatic cancer model. This targeting approach localized the drug to tumors and showed superior efficacy with reduced toxicity compared to a pan-CDCP1 targeting approach, improving the therapeutic index.

Concluding remarks: untangling the extracellular protease web in cancer progression, toward effective therapeutic interventions

Decades of research have unequivocally established an extensive network of extracellular proteases as pivotal players in cancer. These enzymes, by cleaving a variety of substrates within the tumor microenvironment, significantly contribute to tumor progression and metastasis. However, due to the complexities in protease regulation and their overlapping function within the extracellular microenvironment, untangling this protease web is challenging, and effective therapeutic interventions have remained largely elusive. For example, MMP-inhibiting drugs were developed in the 1990s and showed great promise in preclinical studies, but culminated in clinical trials with broadly disappointing outcomes (418). The reasons for the failure of these drugs were multi-fold; contributing factors included poor specificity and dose-limiting toxicity of the drugs, incomplete understanding of the biology, and trial designs that were, in retrospect, nonideal. Treated patients were in very late stages of the disease, when many of the aspects of cancer progression fueled by MMPs had already occurred (418).

Over the past several years, agents developed to more selectively target individual proteases or smaller sub-families have been brought forward into clinical trials. Recent targets include MMP-9, MT1-MMP, sheddases ADAM-10 and ADAM-17, and cell-surface serine proteases DPP IV and FAP (298, 419). Agents include therapeutic antibodies as well as small molecules and in some cases more complex conjugates. Strategies for targeting cell surface-anchored proteases can extend beyond merely blocking proteolytic activity, and use them as markers to direct immunotherapies toward particular cell types or as activators for pro-drug conjugates (419). For example, recent efforts to target FAP stem from the observation that this protease is expressed nearly exclusively on tumor-promoting cancer-associated fibroblasts. This specific localization enables immunotherapeutic strategies such as chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cells engineered to eliminate these tumor-promoting fibroblasts via recognition of FAP (419, 420). While this approach holds promise, in general, the outcomes from clinical trials of protease inhibitors in cancer have continued to show disappointing or mixed results, likely reflecting the complexity of the proteolytic landscape.

To address the challenge, we need both big-picture insights from a systems approach, and yet more detailed cataloging of the individual components and interactions within the system. Continued efforts to link specific proteases to their specific substrates and to connect distinct cleavage events to their pathological consequences are essential. This effort involves tracing the actions and impacts of individual molecular entities within the broader narrative of cancer. Integrating this knowledge across the myriad enzymes and families will help identify critical control points and potential targets for intervention. Furthermore, this endeavor requires a context-specific lens, acknowledging that the ensemble of key players varies across different types of cancer, stages of progression, and distinct tumor microenvironments. Encouragingly, the development of new tools and methodologies is facilitating these advances. Innovations in mass-spectrometry-based substrate profiling, activity-based probes, and other chemical biology tools are enhancing our ability to study proteases in more nuanced and sophisticated ways. These technological leaps hold the promise of not only deepening our understanding of cancer biology but also, at last, of introducing effective therapeutic interventions targeting proteases and proteolytic pathways.

Conflict of interest

The author is an Editorial Board Member for the Journal of Biological Chemistry and was not involved in the editorial review or the decision to publish this article.

Author contribution

E. S. R. conceptualization, E. S. R. visualization, E. S. R. funding acquisition, E. S. R. writing–original draft, E. S. R. writing–review and editing.

Funding and additional information

E. S. R. is supported by 10.13039/100000002 US National Institutes of Health grants R01GM132100, R01GM144393, R01CA258274, and R01HL157424. The content is solely the responsibility of the author and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.
==== Refs
References

1 Radzicka A. Wolfenden R. Rates of uncatalyzed peptide bond hydrolysis in neutral solution and the transition state affinities of proteases J. Am. Chem. Soc. 118 1996 6105 6109
2 Klein T. Eckhard U. Dufour A. Solis N. Overall C.M. Proteolytic cleavage-mechanisms, function, and "Omic" approaches for a near-ubiquitous posttranslational modification Chem. Rev. 118 2018 1137 1168 29265812
3 Lopez-Otin C. Matrisian L.M. Emerging roles of proteases in tumour suppression Nat. Rev. Cancer 7 2007 800 808 17851543
4 Noel A. Gutierrez-Fernandez A. Sounni N.E. Behrendt N. Maquoi E. Lund I.K. New and paradoxical roles of matrix metalloproteinases in the tumor microenvironment Front. Pharmacol. 3 2012 140 22822400
5 Boice A. Bouchier-Hayes L. Targeting apoptotic caspases in cancer Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Cell Res. 1867 2020 118688 32087180
6 Best J.L. Ganiatsas S. Agarwal S. Changou A. Salomoni P. Shirihai O. SUMO-1 protease-1 regulates gene transcription through PML Mol. Cell 10 2002 843 855 12419228
7 Bawa-Khalfe T. Yeh E.T. SUMO losing balance: SUMO proteases disrupt SUMO homeostasis to facilitate cancer development and progression Genes Cancer 1 2010 748 752 21152235
8 Lopez-Mosqueda J. Maddi K. Prgomet S. Kalayil S. Marinovic-Terzic I. Terzic J. SPRTN is a mammalian DNA-binding metalloprotease that resolves DNA-protein crosslinks eLife 5 2016 e21491 27852435
9 Kojima Y. Machida Y. Palani S. Caulfield T.R. Radisky E.S. Kaufmann S.H. FAM111A protects replication forks from protein obstacles via its trypsin-like domain Nat. Commun. 11 2020 1318 32165630
10 Quirós P.M. Español Y. Acín-Pérez R. Rodríguez F. Bárcena C. Watanabe K. ATP-dependent Lon protease controls tumor bioenergetics by reprogramming mitochondrial activity Cell Rep. 8 2014 542 556 25017063
11 Cole A. Wang Z. Coyaud E. Voisin V. Gronda M. Jitkova Y. Inhibition of the mitochondrial protease ClpP as a therapeutic strategy for human acute myeloid leukemia Cancer Cell 27 2015 864 876 26058080
12 Jobin P.G. Butler G.S. Overall C.M. New intracellular activities of matrix metalloproteinases shine in the moonlight Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Cell Res. 1864 2017 2043 2055 28526562
13 Madala P.K. Tyndall J.D. Nall T. Fairlie D.P. Update 1 of: proteases universally recognize beta strands in their active sites Chem. Rev. 110 2010 PR1 PR31
14 Schechter I. Berger A. On the size of the active site in proteases. I. Papain Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 27 1967 157 162 6035483
15 Hedstrom L. Serine protease mechanism and specificity Chem. Rev. 102 2002 4501 4524 12475199
16 Overall C.M. Molecular determinants of metalloproteinase substrate specificity Mol. Biotechnol. 22 2002 51 86 12353914
17 Jabaiah A.M. Getz J.A. Witkowski W.A. Hardy J.A. Daugherty P.S. Identification of protease exosite-interacting peptides that enhance substrate cleavage kinetics Biol. Chem. 393 2012 933 941 22944693
18 Liotta L.A. Tryggvason K. Garbisa S. Hart I. Foltz C.M. Shafie S. Metastatic potential correlates with enzymatic degradation of basement membrane collagen Nature 284 1980 67 68 6243750
19 Liotta L.A. Abe S. Robey P.G. Martin G.R. Preferential digestion of basement membrane collagen by an enzyme derived from a metastatic murine tumor Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 76 1979 2268 2272 221920
20 Radisky E.S. Coban M. Enyzmes| Matrix Metalloproteinases. In Encyclopedia of Biological Chemistry: Third Edition 2021 Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier 336 353
21 Hotary K.B. Allen E.D. Brooks P.C. Datta N.S. Long M.W. Weiss S.J. Membrane type I matrix metalloproteinase usurps tumor growth control imposed by the three-dimensional extracellular matrix Cell 114 2003 33 45 12859896
22 Sabeh F. Ota I. Holmbeck K. Birkedal-Hansen H. Soloway P. Balbin M. Tumor cell traffic through the extracellular matrix is controlled by the membrane-anchored collagenase MT1-MMP J. Cell Biol. 167 2004 769 781 15557125
23 Hotary K. Li X.Y. Allen E. Stevens S.L. Weiss S.J. A cancer cell metalloprotease triad regulates the basement membrane transmigration program Genes Dev. 20 2006 2673 2686 16983145
24 Sabeh F. Li X.Y. Saunders T.L. Rowe R.G. Weiss S.J. Secreted versus membrane-anchored collagenases: relative roles in fibroblast-dependent collagenolysis and invasion J. Biol. Chem. 284 2009 23001 23011 19542530
25 Mignatti P. Robbins E. Rifkin D.B. Tumor invasion through the human amniotic membrane: requirement for a proteinase cascade Cell 47 1986 487 498 3022933
26 Reich R. Thompson E.W. Iwamoto Y. Martin G.R. Deason J.R. Fuller G.C. Effects of inhibitors of plasminogen activator, serine proteinases, and collagenase IV on the invasion of basement membranes by metastatic cells Cancer Res. 48 1988 3307 3312 2836052
27 Eckhard U. Huesgen P.F. Schilling O. Bellac C.L. Butler G.S. Cox J.H. Active site specificity profiling of the matrix metalloproteinase family: proteomic identification of 4300 cleavage sites by nine MMPs explored with structural and synthetic peptide cleavage analyses Matrix Biol. 49 2016 37 60 26407638
28 Kessenbrock K. Plaks V. Werb Z. Matrix metalloproteinases: regulators of the tumor microenvironment Cell 141 2010 52 67 20371345
29 Lochter A. Galosy S. Muschler J. Freedman N. Werb Z. Bissell M.J. Matrix metalloproteinase stromelysin-1 triggers a cascade of molecular alterations that leads to stable epithelial-to-mesenchymal conversion and a premalignant phenotype in mammary epithelial cells J. Cell Biol. 139 1997 1861 1872 9412478
30 Noe V. Fingleton B. Jacobs K. Crawford H.C. Vermeulen S. Steelant W. Release of an invasion promoter E-cadherin fragment by matrilysin and stromelysin-1 J. Cell Sci. 114 2001 111 118 11112695
31 Davies G. Jiang W.G. Mason M.D. Matrilysin mediates extracellular cleavage of E-cadherin from prostate cancer cells: a key mechanism in hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor-induced cell-cell dissociation and in vitro invasion Clin. Cancer Res. 7 2001 3289 3297 11595727
32 Symowicz J. Adley B.P. Gleason K.J. Johnson J.J. Ghosh S. Fishman D.A. Engagement of collagen-binding integrins promotes matrix metalloproteinase-9–dependent E-cadherin ectodomain shedding in ovarian carcinoma cells Cancer Res. 67 2007 2030 2039 17332331
33 Cerda-Costa N. Gomis-Ruth F.X. Architecture and function of metallopeptidase catalytic domains Protein Sci. 23 2014 123 144 24596965
34 Edwards D.R. Handsley M.M. Pennington C.J. The ADAM metalloproteinases Mol. Aspects Med. 29 2008 258 289 18762209
35 Borrell-Pagès M. Rojo F. Albanell J. Baselga J. Arribas J. TACE is required for the activation of the EGFR by TGF-α in tumors EMBO J. 22 2003 1114 1124 12606576
36 Sahin U. Weskamp G. Kelly K. Zhou H.-M. Higashiyama S. Peschon J. Distinct roles for ADAM10 and ADAM17 in ectodomain shedding of six EGFR ligands J. Cell Biol. 164 2004 769 779 14993236
37 Maretzky T. Reiss K. Ludwig A. Buchholz J. Scholz F. Proksch E. ADAM10 mediates E-cadherin shedding and regulates epithelial cell-cell adhesion, migration, and β-catenin translocation Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102 2005 9182 9187 15958533
38 Hikita A. Yana I. Wakeyama H. Nakamura M. Kadono Y. Oshima Y. Negative regulation of osteoclastogenesis by ectodomain shedding of receptor activator of NF-κB ligand J. Biol. Chem. 281 2006 36846 36855 17018528
39 Klessner J.L. Desai B.V. Amargo E.V. Getsios S. Green K.J. EGFR and ADAMs cooperate to regulate shedding and endocytic trafficking of the desmosomal cadherin desmoglein 2 Mol. Biol. Cell 20 2009 328 337 18987342
40 Murphy G. The ADAMs: signalling scissors in the tumour microenvironment Nat. Rev. Cancer 8 2008 929 941 19005493
41 Kelwick R. Desanlis I. Wheeler G.N. Edwards D.R. The ADAMTS (A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs) family Genome Biol. 16 2015 113 26025392
42 Matthews R.T. Gary S.C. Zerillo C. Pratta M. Solomon K. Arner E.C. Brain-enriched hyaluronan binding (BEHAB)/brevican cleavage in a glioma cell line is mediated by a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTS) family member J. Biol. Chem. 275 2000 22695 22703 10801887
43 Viapiano M.S. Hockfield S. Matthews R.T. BEHAB/brevican requires ADAMTS-mediated proteolytic cleavage to promote glioma invasion J. Neurooncol. 88 2008 261 272 18398576
44 Hu B. Kong L.L. Matthews R.T. Viapiano M.S. The proteoglycan brevican binds to fibronectin after proteolytic cleavage and promotes glioma cell motility J. Biol. Chem. 283 2008 24848 24859 18611854
45 Lu X. Wang Q. Hu G. Van Poznak C. Fleisher M. Reiss M. ADAMTS1 and MMP1 proteolytically engage EGF-like ligands in an osteolytic signaling cascade for bone metastasis Genes Dev. 23 2009 1882 1894 19608765
46 Cal S. Lopez-Otin C. ADAMTS proteases and cancer Matrix Biol. 44-46 2015 77 85 25636539
47 Redondo-Garcia S. Peris-Torres C. Caracuel-Peramos R. Rodriguez-Manzaneque J.C. ADAMTS proteases and the tumor immune microenvironment: lessons from substrates and pathologies Matrix Biol. Plus 9 2021 100054 33718860
48 Browner M.F. Smith W.W. Castelhano A.L. Matrilysin-inhibitor complexes: common themes among metalloproteases Biochemistry 34 1995 6602 6610 7756291
49 Bertini I. Calderone V. Fragai M. Luchinat C. Maletta M. Yeo K.J. Snapshots of the reaction mechanism of matrix metalloproteinases Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 45 2006 7952 7955
50 Tallant C. Marrero A. Gomis-Ruth F.X. Matrix metalloproteinases: fold and function of their catalytic domains Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1803 2010 20 28 19374923
51 Bode W. Fernandez-Catalan C. Tschesche H. Grams F. Nagase H. Maskos K. Structural properties of matrix metalloproteinases Cell Mol. Life Sci. 55 1999 639 652 10357232
52 Ratnikov B.I. Cieplak P. Gramatikoff K. Pierce J. Eroshkin A. Igarashi Y. Basis for substrate recognition and distinction by matrix metalloproteinases Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111 2014 E4148 E4155 25246591
53 Pelmenschikov V. Siegbahn P.E. Catalytic mechanism of matrix metalloproteinases: two-layered ONIOM study Inorg. Chem. 41 2002 5659 5666 12401069
54 Perez-Silva J.G. Espanol Y. Velasco G. Quesada V. The Degradome database: expanding roles of mammalian proteases in life and disease Nucleic Acids Res. 44 2016 D351 D355 26553809
55 Nierodzik M.L. Plotkin A. Kajumo F. Karpatkin S. Thrombin stimulates tumor-platelet adhesion in vitro and metastasis in vivo J. Clin. Invest. 87 1991 229 236 1845869
56 Nierodzik M.L. Kajumo F. Karpatkin S. Effect of thrombin treatment of tumor cells on adhesion of tumor cells to platelets in vitro and tumor metastasis in vivo Cancer Res. 52 1992 3267 3272 1596884
57 Hu L. Lee M. Campbell W. Perez-Soler R. Karpatkin S. Role of endogenous thrombin in tumor implantation, seeding, and spontaneous metastasis Blood 104 2004 2746 2751 15265791
58 Palumbo J.S. Talmage K.E. Massari J.V. La Jeunesse C.M. Flick M.J. Kombrinck K.W. Platelets and fibrin(ogen) increase metastatic potential by impeding natural killer cell–mediated elimination of tumor cells Blood 105 2005 178 185 15367435
59 Adams G.N. Rosenfeldt L. Frederick M. Miller W. Waltz D. Kombrinck K. Colon cancer growth and dissemination relies upon thrombin, stromal PAR-1, and fibrinogen Cancer Res. 75 2015 4235 4243 26238780
60 Yang Y. Stang A. Schweickert P.G. Lanman N.A. Paul E.N. Monia B.P. Thrombin signaling promotes pancreatic adenocarcinoma through PAR-1–dependent immune evasion Cancer Res. 79 2019 3417 3430 31048498
61 Nierodzik M.L. Karpatkin S. Thrombin induces tumor growth, metastasis, and angiogenesis: evidence for a thrombin-regulated dormant tumor phenotype Cancer Cell 10 2006 355 362 17097558
62 Cantrell R. Palumbo J.S. The thrombin-inflammation axis in cancer progression Thromb. Res. 191 2020 S117 S122 32736768
63 Fischer E.G. Ruf W. Mueller B.M. Tissue factor-initiated thrombin generation activates the signaling thrombin receptor on malignant melanoma cells Cancer Res. 55 1995 1629 1632 7712465
64 Nierodzik M.L. Chen K. Takeshita K. Li J.J. Huang Y.Q. Feng X.S. Protease-activated receptor 1 (PAR-1) is required and rate-limiting for thrombin-enhanced experimental pulmonary metastasis Blood 92 1998 3694 3700 9808563
65 Vu T.-K.H. Hung D.T. Wheaton V.I. Coughlin S.R. Molecular cloning of a functional thrombin receptor reveals a novel proteolytic mechanism of receptor activation Cell 64 1991 1057 1068 1672265
66 Nystedt S. Emilsson K. Wahlestedt C. Sundelin J. Molecular cloning of a potential proteinase activated receptor Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 91 1994 9208 9212 7937743
67 Molino M. Barnathan E.S. Numerof R. Clark J. Dreyer M. Cumashi A. Interactions of mast cell tryptase with thrombin receptors and PAR-2 J. Biol. Chem. 272 1997 4043 4049 9020112
68 Quinton T.M. Kim S. Derian C.K. Jin J. Kunapuli S.P. Plasmin-mediated activation of platelets occurs by cleavage of protease-activated receptor 4 J. Biol. Chem. 279 2004 18434 18439 14973136
69 Oikonomopoulou K. Hansen K.K. Saifeddine M. Tea I. Blaber M. Blaber S.I. Proteinase-activated receptors, targets for kallikrein signaling J. Biol. Chem. 281 2006 32095 32112 16885167
70 Boire A. Covic L. Agarwal A. Jacques S. Sherifi S. Kuliopulos A. PAR1 is a matrix metalloprotease-1 receptor that promotes invasion and tumorigenesis of breast cancer cells Cell 120 2005 303 313 15707890
71 Koivunen E. Ristimaki A. Itkonen O. Osman S. Vuento M. Stenman U.H. Tumor-associated trypsin participates in cancer cell-mediated degradation of extracellular matrix Cancer Res. 51 1991 2107 2112 2009530
72 Koivunen E. Huhtala M.L. Stenman U.H. Human ovarian tumor-associated trypsin. Its purification and characterization from mucinous cyst fluid and identification as an activator of pro-urokinase J. Biol. Chem. 264 1989 14095 14099 2503510
73 Sorsa T. Salo T. Koivunen E. Tyynela J. Konttinen Y.T. Bergmann U. Activation of type IV procollagenases by human tumor-associated trypsin-2 J. Biol. Chem. 272 1997 21067 21074 9261109
74 Moilanen M. Sorsa T. Stenman M. Nyberg P. Lindy O. Vesterinen J. Tumor-associated trypsinogen-2 (trypsinogen-2) activates procollagenases (MMP-1, -8, -13) and stromelysin-1 (MMP-3) and degrades type I collagen Biochemistry 42 2003 5414 5420 12731883
75 Darmoul D. Marie J. Devaud H. Gratio V. Laburthe M. Initiation of human colon cancer cell proliferation by trypsin acting at protease-activated receptor-2 Br. J. Cancer 85 2001 772 779 11531266
76 Darmoul D. Gratio V. Devaud H. Laburthe M. Protease-activated receptor 2 in colon cancer: trypsin-induced MAPK phosphorylation and cell proliferation are mediated by epidermal growth factor receptor transactivation J. Biol. Chem. 279 2004 20927 20934 15010475
77 Salameh M.A. Robinson J.L. Navaneetham D. Sinha D. Madden B.J. Walsh P.N. The amyloid precursor protein/protease nexin 2 Kunitz inhibitor domain is a highly specific substrate of mesotrypsin J. Biol. Chem. 285 2010 1939 1949 19920152
78 Hockla A. Radisky D.C. Radisky E.S. Mesotrypsin promotes malignant growth of breast cancer cells through shedding of CD109 Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 124 2010 27 38 20035377
79 Jiang G. Cao F. Ren G. Gao D. Bhakta V. Zhang Y. PRSS3 promotes tumour growth and metastasis of human pancreatic cancer Gut 59 2010 1535 1544 20947888
80 Hockla A. Miller E. Salameh M.A. Copland J.A. Radisky D.C. Radisky E.S. PRSS3/mesotrypsin is a therapeutic target for metastatic prostate cancer Mol. Cancer Res. 10 2012 1555 1566 23258495
81 Han S. Lee C.W. Trevino J.G. Hughes S.J. Sarosi G.A. Jr. Autocrine extra-pancreatic trypsin 3 secretion promotes cell proliferation and survival in esophageal adenocarcinoma PLoS One 8 2013 e76667 24146905
82 Pendlebury D. Wang R. Henin R.D. Hockla A. Soares A.S. Madden B.J. Sequence and conformational specificity in substrate recognition: several human Kunitz protease inhibitor domains are specific substrates of mesotrypsin J. Biol. Chem. 289 2014 32783 32797 25301953
83 Ghilardi C. Silini A. Figini S. Anastasia A. Lupi M. Fruscio R. Trypsinogen 4 boosts tumor endothelial cells migration through proteolysis of tissue factor pathway inhibitor-2 Oncotarget 6 2015 28389 28400 26318044
84 Srinivasan S. Kryza T. Batra J. Clements J. Remodelling of the tumour microenvironment by the kallikrein-related peptidases Nat. Rev. Cancer 22 2022 223 238 35102281
85 Yoon H. Laxmikanthan G. Lee J. Blaber S.I. Rodriguez A. Kogot J.M. Activation profiles and regulatory cascades of the human kallikrein-related peptidases J. Biol. Chem. 282 2007 31852 31864 17823117
86 Takayama T.K. McMullen B.A. Nelson P.S. Matsumura M. Fujikawa K. Characterization of hK4 (prostase), a prostate-specific serine protease: activation of the precursor of prostate specific antigen (pro-PSA) and single-chain urokinase-type plasminogen activator and degradation of prostatic acid phosphatase Biochemistry 40 2001 15341 15348 11735417
87 Fuhrman-Luck R.A. Stansfield S.H. Stephens C.R. Loessner D. Clements J.A. Prostate cancer-associated kallikrein-related peptidase 4 activates matrix metalloproteinase-1 and thrombospondin-1 J. Proteome Res. 15 2016 2466 2478 27378148
88 Silva L.M. Kryza T. Stoll T. Hoogland C. Dong Y. Stephens C.R. Integration of two in-depth quantitative proteomics approaches determines the kallikrein-related peptidase 7 (KLK7) degradome in ovarian cancer cell secretome Mol. Cell Proteomics 18 2019 818 836 30705123
89 Johnson S.K. Ramani V.C. Hennings L. Haun R.S. Kallikrein 7 enhances pancreatic cancer cell invasion by shedding E-cadherin Cancer 109 2007 1811 1820 17354228
90 Jiang R. Shi Z. Johnson J.J. Liu Y. Stack M.S. Kallikrein-5 promotes cleavage of desmoglein-1 and loss of cell-cell cohesion in oral squamous cell carcinoma J. Biol. Chem. 286 2011 9127 9135 21163944
91 Ramani V.C. Hennings L. Haun R.S. Desmoglein 2 is a substrate of kallikrein 7 in pancreatic cancer BMC Cancer 8 2008 373 19091121
92 Chou R.H. Lin S.C. Wen H.C. Wu C.W. Chang W.S. Epigenetic activation of human kallikrein 13 enhances malignancy of lung adenocarcinoma by promoting N-cadherin expression and laminin degradation Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 409 2011 442 447 21596022
93 Ramsay A.J. Dong Y. Hunt M.L. Linn M. Samaratunga H. Clements J.A. Kallikrein-related peptidase 4 (KLK4) initiates intracellular signaling via protease-activated receptors (PARs). KLK4 and PAR-2 are co-expressed during prostate cancer progression J. Biol. Chem. 283 2008 12293 12304 18308730
94 Mize G.J. Wang W. Takayama T.K. Prostate-specific kallikreins-2 and -4 enhance the proliferation of DU-145 prostate cancer cells through protease-activated receptors-1 and -2 Mol. Cancer Res. 6 2008 1043 1051 18567807
95 Wang W. Mize G.J. Zhang X. Takayama T.K. Kallikrein-related peptidase-4 initiates tumor-stroma interactions in prostate cancer through protease-activated receptor-1 Int. J. Cancer 126 2010 599 610 19795418
96 Martin C.E. List K. Cell surface-anchored serine proteases in cancer progression and metastasis Cancer Metastasis Rev. 38 2019 357 387 31529338
97 Szabo R. Rasmussen A.L. Moyer A.B. Kosa P. Schafer J.M. Molinolo A.A. c-Met-induced epithelial carcinogenesis is initiated by the serine protease matriptase Oncogene 30 2011 2003 2016 21217780
98 Zoratti G.L. Tanabe L.M. Varela F.A. Murray A.S. Bergum C. Colombo E. Targeting matriptase in breast cancer abrogates tumour progression via impairment of stromal-epithelial growth factor signalling Nat. Commun. 6 2015 6776 25873032
99 Zoratti G.L. Tanabe L.M. Hyland T.E. Duhaime M.J. Colombo E. Leduc R. Matriptase regulates c-Met mediated proliferation and invasion in inflammatory breast cancer Oncotarget 7 2016 58162 58173 27528224
100 Owen K.A. Qiu D. Alves J. Schumacher A.M. Kilpatrick L.M. Li J. Pericellular activation of hepatocyte growth factor by the transmembrane serine proteases matriptase and hepsin, but not by the membrane-associated protease uPA Biochem. J. 426 2010 219 228 20015050
101 Lucas J.M. Heinlein C. Kim T. Hernandez S.A. Malik M.S. True L.D. The androgen-regulated protease TMPRSS2 activates a proteolytic cascade involving components of the tumor microenvironment and promotes prostate cancer metastasis Cancer Discov. 4 2014 1310 1325 25122198
102 Lee S.L. Dickson R.B. Lin C.Y. Activation of hepatocyte growth factor and urokinase/plasminogen activator by matriptase, an epithelial membrane serine protease J. Biol. Chem. 275 2000 36720 36725 10962009
103 Takeuchi T. Harris J.L. Huang W. Yan K.W. Coughlin S.R. Craik C.S. Cellular localization of membrane-type serine protease 1 and identification of protease-activated receptor-2 and single-chain urokinase-type plasminogen activator as substrates J. Biol. Chem. 275 2000 26333 26342 10831593
104 Suzuki M. Kobayashi H. Kanayama N. Saga Y. Suzuki M. Lin C.Y. Inhibition of tumor invasion by genomic down-regulation of matriptase through suppression of activation of receptor-bound pro-urokinase J. Biol. Chem. 279 2004 14899 14908 14747469
105 Moran P. Li W. Fan B. Vij R. Eigenbrot C. Kirchhofer D. Pro-urokinase-type plasminogen activator is a substrate for hepsin J. Biol. Chem. 281 2006 30439 30446 16908524
106 Sales K.U. Friis S. Konkel J.E. Godiksen S. Hatakeyama M. Hansen K.K. Non-hematopoietic PAR-2 is essential for matriptase-driven pre-malignant progression and potentiation of ras-mediated squamous cell carcinogenesis Oncogene 34 2015 346 356 24469043
107 El Rayes T. Catena R. Lee S. Stawowczyk M. Joshi N. Fischbach C. Lung inflammation promotes metastasis through neutrophil protease-mediated degradation of Tsp-1 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112 2015 16000 16005 26668367
108 Albrengues J. Shields M.A. Ng D. Park C.G. Ambrico A. Poindexter M.E. Neutrophil extracellular traps produced during inflammation awaken dormant cancer cells in mice Science 361 2018 eaao4227
109 Wilson T.J. Nannuru K.C. Singh R.K. Cathepsin G-mediated activation of pro-matrix metalloproteinase 9 at the tumor-bone interface promotes transforming growth factor-beta signaling and bone destruction Mol. Cancer Res. 7 2009 1224 1233 19671689
110 Wilson T.J. Nannuru K.C. Futakuchi M. Sadanandam A. Singh R.K. Cathepsin G enhances mammary tumor-induced osteolysis by generating soluble receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand Cancer Res. 68 2008 5803 5811 18632634
111 Wilson T.J. Nannuru K.C. Singh R.K. Cathepsin G recruits osteoclast precursors via proteolytic activation of protease-activated receptor-1 Cancer Res. 69 2009 3188 3195 19293192
112 Cui C. Chakraborty K. Tang X.A. Zhou G. Schoenfelt K.Q. Becker K.M. Neutrophil elastase selectively kills cancer cells and attenuates tumorigenesis Cell 184 2021 3163 3177.e3121 33964209
113 De Zutter A. Van Damme J. Struyf S. The role of post-translational modifications of chemokines by CD26 in cancer Cancers 13 2021 4247 34503058
114 Proost P. Schutyser E. Menten P. Struyf S. Wuyts A. Opdenakker G. Amino-terminal truncation of CXCR3 agonists impairs receptor signaling and lymphocyte chemotaxis, while preserving antiangiogenic properties Blood 98 2001 3554 3561 11739156
115 Barreira da Silva R. Laird M.E. Yatim N. Fiette L. Ingersoll M.A. Albert M.L. Dipeptidylpeptidase 4 inhibition enhances lymphocyte trafficking, improving both naturally occurring tumor immunity and immunotherapy Nat. Immunol. 16 2015 850 858 26075911
116 Nishina S. Yamauchi A. Kawaguchi T. Kaku K. Goto M. Sasaki K. Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors reduce hepatocellular carcinoma by activating lymphocyte chemotaxis in mice Cell. Mol. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 7 2019 115 134 30510994
117 Puré E. Blomberg R. Pro-tumorigenic roles of fibroblast activation protein in cancer: back to the basics Oncogene 37 2018 4343 4357 29720723
118 Monsky W.L. Lin C.-Y. Aoyama A. Kelly T. Akiyama S.K. Mueller S.C. A potential marker protease of invasiveness, separase, is localized on invadopodia of human malignant melanoma cells Cancer Res. 54 1994 5702 5710 7923219
119 Santos A.M. Jung J. Aziz N. Kissil J.L. Puré E. Targeting fibroblast activation protein inhibits tumor stromagenesis and growth in mice J. Clin. Invest. 119 2009 3613 3625 19920354
120 Fan M.-H. Zhu Q. Li H.-H. Ra H.-J. Majumdar S. Gulick D.L. Fibroblast activation protein (FAP) accelerates collagen degradation and clearance from lungs in mice J. Biol. Chem. 291 2016 8070 8089 26663085
121 Kayode O. Huang Z. Soares A.S. Caulfield T.R. Dong Z. Bode A.M. Small molecule inhibitors of mesotrypsin from a structure-based docking screen PLoS One 12 2017 e0176694
122 Matthews B.W. Sigler P. Henderson R. Blow D. Three-dimensional structure of tosyl-α-chymotrypsin Nature 214 1967 652 656 6049071
123 Shotton D. Watson H. Three-dimensional structure of tosyl-elastase Nature 225 1970 811 816 5415110
124 Stroud R.M. Kay L.M. Dickerson R.E. The structure of bovine trypsin: electron density maps of the inhibited enzyme at 5 Å and at 2.7 Å resolution J. Mol. Biol. 83 1974 185 208 4821870
125 Kraut J. Serine proteases: structure and mechanism of catalysis Annu. Rev. Biochem. 46 1977 331 358 332063
126 Craik C.S. Roczniak S. Largman C. Rutter W.J. The catalytic role of the active site aspartic acid in serine proteases Science 237 1987 909 913 3303334
127 Sprang S. Standing T. Fletterick R. Stroud R. Finer-Moore J. Xuong N. The three-dimensional structure of Asn102 mutant of trypsin: role of Asp102 in serine protease catalysis Science 237 1987 905 909 3112942
128 Corey D.R. Craik C.S. An investigation into the minimum requirements for peptide hydrolysis by mutation of the catalytic triad of trypsin J. Am. Chem. Soc. 114 1992 1784 1790
129 Goettig P. Brandstetter H. Magdolen V. Surface loops of trypsin-like serine proteases as determinants of function Biochimie 166 2019 52 76 31505212
130 Perona J.J. Craik C.S. Evolutionary divergence of substrate specificity within the chymotrypsin-like serine protease fold J. Biol. Chem. 272 1997 29987 29990 9374470
131 Rasmussen H.B. Branner S. Wiberg F.C. Wagtmann N. Crystal structure of human dipeptidyl peptidase IV/CD26 in complex with a substrate analog Nat. Struct. Biol. 10 2003 19 25 12483204
132 Thoma R. Löffler B. Stihle M. Huber W. Ruf A. Hennig M. Structural basis of proline-specific exopeptidase activity as observed in human dipeptidyl peptidase-IV Structure 11 2003 947 959 12906826
133 Henderson R. Structure of crystalline α-chymotrypsin: IV. The structure of indoleacryloyl-α-chymotrypsin and its relevance to the hydrolytic mechanism of the enzyme J. Mol. Biol. 54 1970 341 354 5494034
134 Radisky E.S. Lee J.M. Lu C.J. Koshland D.E. Jr. Insights into the serine protease mechanism from atomic resolution structures of trypsin reaction intermediates Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103 2006 6835 6840 16636277
135 Fuhrmann C.N. Daugherty M.D. Agard D.A. Subangstrom crystallography reveals that short ionic hydrogen bonds, and not a His-Asp low-barrier hydrogen bond, stabilize the transition state in serine protease catalysis J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128 2006 9086 9102 16834383
136 Topf M. Richards W.G. Theoretical studies on the deacylation step of serine protease catalysis in the gas phase, in solution, and in elastase J. Am. Chem. Soc. 126 2004 14631 14641 15521783
137 Blow D.M. Birktoft J.J. Hartley B.S. Role of a buried acid group in the mechanism of action of chymotrypsin Nature 221 1969 337 340 5764436
138 Hunkapiller M.W. Smallcombe S.H. Whitaker D.R. Richards J.H. Carbon nuclear magnetic resonance studies of the histidine residue in α-lytic protease. Implications for the catalytic mechanism of serine proteases Biochemistry 12 1973 4732 4743 4204227
139 Frey P.A. Whitt S.A. Tobin J.B. A low-barrier hydrogen bond in the catalytic triad of serine proteases Science 264 1994 1927 1930 7661899
140 Everill P. Sudmeier J.L. Bachovchin W.W. Direct NMR observation and pKa determination of the Asp102 side chain in a serine protease J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134 2012 2348 2354 22229736
141 Fodor K. Harmat V. Neutze R. Szilágyi L. Gráf L. Katona G. Enzyme: substrate hydrogen bond shortening during the acylation phase of serine protease catalysis Biochemistry 45 2006 2114 2121 16475800
142 Turk V. Stoka V. Vasiljeva O. Renko M. Sun T. Turk B. Cysteine cathepsins: from structure, function and regulation to new frontiers Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1824 2012 68 88 22024571
143 Olson O.C. Joyce J.A. Cysteine cathepsin proteases: regulators of cancer progression and therapeutic response Nat. Rev. Cancer 15 2015 712 729 26597527
144 Reddy V.Y. Zhang Q.-Y. Weiss S.J. Pericellular mobilization of the tissue-destructive cysteine proteinases, cathepsins B, L, and S, by human monocyte-derived macrophages Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 92 1995 3849 3853 7731994
145 Gocheva V. Wang H.-W. Gadea B.B. Shree T. Hunter K.E. Garfall A.L. IL-4 induces cathepsin protease activity in tumor-associated macrophages to promote cancer growth and invasion Genes Dev. 24 2010 241 255 20080943
146 Buck M. Karustis D.G. Day N. Honn K. Sloane B.F. Degradation of extracellular-matrix proteins by human cathepsin B from normal and tumour tissues Biochem. J. 282 1992 273 278 1540143
147 Guinec N. Dalet-Fumeron V. Pagano M. “In vitro” study of basement membrane degradation by the cysteine proteinases, cathepsins B, B-like and L. Digestion of collagen IV, laminin, fibronectin, and release of gelatinase activities front basement membrane fibronectin Biol. Chem. 374 1993 1135 1146
148 Chang S.-H. Kanasaki K. Gocheva V. Blum G. Harper J. Moses M.A. VEGF-A induces angiogenesis by perturbing the cathepsin-cysteine protease inhibitor balance in venules, causing basement membrane degradation and mother vessel formation Cancer Res. 69 2009 4537 4544 19435903
149 Prudova A. Gocheva V. auf dem Keller U. Eckhard U. Olson O.C. Akkari L. TAILS N-terminomics and proteomics show protein degradation dominates over proteolytic processing by cathepsins in pancreatic tumors Cell Rep. 16 2016 1762 1773 27477282
150 Vizovisek M. Fonovic M. Turk B. Cysteine cathepsins in extracellular matrix remodeling: extracellular matrix degradation and beyond Matrix Biol. 75-76 2019 141 159 29409929
151 Sobotič B. Vizovišek M. Vidmar R. Van Damme P. Gocheva V. Joyce J.A. Proteomic identification of cysteine cathepsin substrates shed from the surface of cancer cells Mol. Cell Proteomics 14 2015 2213 2228 26081835
152 Gocheva V. Zeng W. Ke D. Klimstra D. Reinheckel T. Peters C. Distinct roles for cysteine cathepsin genes in multistage tumorigenesis Genes Dev. 20 2006 543 556 16481467
153 Sevenich L. Bowman R.L. Mason S.D. Quail D.F. Rapaport F. Elie B.T. Analysis of tumour-and stroma-supplied proteolytic networks reveals a brain-metastasis-promoting role for cathepsin S Nat. Cell Biol. 16 2014 876 888 25086747
154 Abboud-Jarrous G. Atzmon R. Peretz T. Palermo C. Gadea B.B. Joyce J.A. Cathepsin L is responsible for processing and activation of proheparanase through multiple cleavages of a linker segment J. Biol. Chem. 283 2008 18167 18176 18450756
155 Wang B. Sun J. Kitamoto S. Yang M. Grubb A. Chapman H.A. Cathepsin S controls angiogenesis and tumor growth via matrix-derived angiogenic factors J. Biol. Chem. 281 2006 6020 6029 16365041
156 Dall E. Brandstetter H. Structure and function of legumain in health and disease Biochimie 122 2016 126 150 26403494
157 Liu C. Wang J. Zheng Y. Zhu Y. Zhou Z. Liu Z. Autocrine pro-legumain promotes breast cancer metastasis via binding to integrin αvβ3 Oncogene 41 2022 4091 4103 35854065
158 Wu W. Luo Y. Sun C. Liu Y. Kuo P. Varga J. Targeting cell-impermeable prodrug activation to tumor microenvironment eradicates multiple drug-resistant neoplasms Cancer Res. 66 2006 970 980 16424032
159 Greenspan P.D. Clark K.L. Tommasi R.A. Cowen S.D. McQuire L.W. Farley D.L. Identification of dipeptidyl nitriles as potent and selective inhibitors of cathepsin B through structure-based drug design J. Med. Chem. 44 2001 4524 4534 11741472
160 Musil D. Zucic D. Turk D. Engh R. Mayr I. Huber R. The refined 2.15 AX-ray crystal structure of human liver cathepsin B: the structural basis for its specificity EMBO J. 10 1991 2321 2330 1868826
161 Schröder E. Phillips C. Garman E. Harlos K. Crawford C. X-ray crystallographic structure of a papain-leupeptin complex FEBS Lett. 315 1993 38 42 8416808
162 Biniossek M.L. Nägler D.K. Becker-Pauly C. Schilling O. Proteomic identification of protease cleavage sites characterizes prime and non-prime specificity of cysteine cathepsins B, L, and S J. Proteome Res. 10 2011 5363 5373 21967108
163 Storer A.C. Menard R. Catalytic mechanism in papain family of cysteine peptidases Methods Enzymol. 244 1994 486 500 7845227
164 Polgár L. Mercaptide—imidazolium ion-pair: the reactive nucleophile in papain catalysis FEBS Lett. 47 1974 15 18 4426388
165 Lewis S.D. Johnson F.A. Shafer J.A. Potentiometric determination of ionizations at the active site of papain Biochemistry 15 1976 5009 5017 10964
166 Lewis S.D. Johnson F.A. Shafer J.A. Effect of cysteine-25 on the ionization of histidine-159 in papain as determined by proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Evidence for a histidine-159-cysteine-25 ion pair and its possible role in catalysis Biochemistry 20 1981 48 51 7470479
167 Mladenovic M. Fink R.F. Thiel W. Schirmeister T. Engels B. On the origin of the stabilization of the zwitterionic resting state of cysteine proteases: a theoretical study J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130 2008 8696 8705 18557615
168 Vernet T. Tessier D.C. Chatellier J. Plouffe C. Lee T.S. Thomas D.Y. Structural and functional roles of asparagine 175 in the cysteine protease papain J. Biol. Chem. 270 1995 16645 16652 7622473
169 Bromme D. Bonneau P.R. Purisima E. Lachance P. Hajnik S. Thomas D.Y. Contribution to activity of histidine-aromatic, amide-aromatic, and aromatic-aromatic interactions in the extended catalytic site of cysteine proteinases Biochemistry 35 1996 3970 3979 8672429
170 Harrison M.J. Burton N.A. Hillier I.H. Catalytic mechanism of the enzyme papain: predictions with a hybrid quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical potential J. Am. Chem. Soc. 119 1997 12285 12291
171 Wei D. Huang X. Liu J. Tang M. Zhan C.-G. Reaction pathway and free energy profile for papain-catalyzed hydrolysis of N-acetyl-Phe-Gly 4-nitroanilide Biochemistry 52 2013 5145 5154 23862626
172 Oanca G. Asadi M. Saha A. Ramachandran B. Warshel A. Exploring the catalytic reaction of cysteine proteases J. Phys. Chem. B 124 2020 11349 11356 33264018
173 Menard R. Carriere J. Laflamme P. Plouffe C. Khouri H.E. Vernet T. Contribution of the glutamine 19 side chain to transition-state stabilization in the oxyanion hole of papain Biochemistry 30 1991 8924 8928 1892809
174 Ma S. Devi-Kesavan L.S. Gao J. Molecular dynamics simulations of the catalytic pathway of a cysteine protease: a combined QM/MM study of human cathepsin K J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129 2007 13633 13645 17935329
175 Radisky E.S. Cathepsin D: regulation in mammary gland remodeling, misregulation in breast cancer Cancer Biol. Ther. 10 2010 467 470 20647745
176 Glondu M. Liaudet-Coopman E. Derocq D. Platet N. Rochefort H. Garcia M. Down-regulation of cathepsin-D expression by antisense gene transfer inhibits tumor growth and experimental lung metastasis of human breast cancer cells Oncogene 21 2002 5127 5134 12140763
177 Berchem G. Glondu M. Gleizes M. Brouillet J.P. Vignon F. Garcia M. Cathepsin-D affects multiple tumor progression steps in vivo: proliferation, angiogenesis and apoptosis Oncogene 21 2002 5951 5955 12185597
178 Hu L. Roth J.M. Brooks P. Luty J. Karpatkin S. Thrombin up-regulates cathepsin D which enhances angiogenesis, growth, and metastasis Cancer Res. 68 2008 4666 4673 18559512
179 Ketterer S. Mitschke J. Ketscher A. Schlimpert M. Reichardt W. Baeuerle N. Cathepsin D deficiency in mammary epithelium transiently stalls breast cancer by interference with mTORC1 signaling Nat. Commun. 11 2020 5133 33046706
180 Benes P. Vetvicka V. Fusek M. Cathepsin D–many functions of one aspartic protease Crit. Rev. Oncol. Hematol. 68 2008 12 28 18396408
181 Liaudet-Coopman E. Beaujouin M. Derocq D. Garcia M. Glondu-Lassis M. Laurent-Matha V. Cathepsin D: newly discovered functions of a long-standing aspartic protease in cancer and apoptosis Cancer Lett. 237 2006 167 179 16046058
182 Brouillet J.P. Spyratos F. Hacene K. Fauque J. Freiss G. Dupont F. Immunoradiometric assay of pro-cathepsin D in breast cancer cytosol: relative prognostic value versus total cathepsin D Eur. J. Cancer 29A 1993 1248 1251 8343262
183 Briozzo P. Morisset M. Capony F. Rougeot C. Rochefort H. In vitro degradation of extracellular matrix with Mr 52,000 cathepsin D secreted by breast cancer cells Cancer Res. 48 1988 3688 3692 3378211
184 Briozzo P. Badet J. Capony F. Pieri I. Montcourrier P. Barritault D. MCF7 mammary cancer cells respond to bFGF and internalize it following its release from extracellular matrix: a permissive role of cathepsin D Exp. Cell Res. 194 1991 252 259 1851098
185 van der Stappen J.W. Williams A.C. Maciewicz R.A. Paraskeva C. Activation of cathepsin B, secreted by a colorectal cancer cell line requires low pH and is mediated by cathepsin D Int. J. Cancer 67 1996 547 554 8759615
186 Laurent-Matha V. Huesgen P.F. Masson O. Derocq D. Prebois C. Gary-Bobo M. Proteolysis of cystatin C by cathepsin D in the breast cancer microenvironment FASEB J. 26 2012 5172 5181 22898924
187 Laurent-Matha V. Derocq D. Prebois C. Katunuma N. Liaudet-Coopman E. Processing of human cathepsin D is independent of its catalytic function and auto-activation: involvement of cathepsins L and B J. Biochem. 139 2006 363 371 16567401
188 Metcalf P. Fusek M. Two crystal structures for cathepsin D: the lysosomal targeting signal and active site EMBO J. 12 1993 1293 1302 8467789
189 Baldwin E.T. Bhat T.N. Gulnik S. Hosur M.V. Sowder R.C. 2nd Cachau R.E. Crystal structures of native and inhibited forms of human cathepsin D: implications for lysosomal targeting and drug design Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 90 1993 6796 6800 8393577
190 Coates L. Tuan H.F. Tomanicek S. Kovalevsky A. Mustyakimov M. Erskine P. The catalytic mechanism of an aspartic proteinase explored with neutron and X-ray diffraction J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130 2008 7235 7237 18479128
191 James M.N. Sielecki A.R. Hayakawa K. Gelb M.H. Crystallographic analysis of transition state mimics bound to penicillopepsin: difluorostatine- and difluorostatone-containing peptides Biochemistry 31 1992 3872 3886 1567842
192 Veerapandian B. Cooper J.B. Sali A. Blundell T.L. Rosati R.L. Dominy B.W. Direct observation by X-ray analysis of the tetrahedral "intermediate" of aspartic proteinases Protein Sci. 1 1992 322 328 1304340
193 Andreeva N.S. Rumsh L.D. Analysis of crystal structures of aspartic proteinases: on the role of amino acid residues adjacent to the catalytic site of pepsin-like enzymes Protein Sci. 10 2001 2439 2450 11714911
194 Windsor I.W. Gold B. Raines R.T. An n→ pi∗ interaction in the bound substrate of aspartic proteases replicates the oxyanion hole ACS Catal. 9 2019 1464 1471 31093467
195 Feliciano M.A.M. Gold B. Unique, yet typical oxyanion holes in aspartic proteases ACS Catal. 10 2020 14201 14209
196 Yan C. Boyd D.D. Regulation of matrix metalloproteinase gene expression J. Cell Physiol. 211 2007 19 26 17167774
197 Khan A.R. James M.N. Molecular mechanisms for the conversion of zymogens to active proteolytic enzymes Protein Sci. 7 1998 815 836 9568890
198 Boon L. Ugarte-Berzal E. Vandooren J. Opdenakker G. Protease propeptide structures, mechanisms of activation, and functions Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 55 2020 111 165 32290726
199 Springman E.B. Angleton E.L. Birkedal-Hansen H. Van Wart H.E. Multiple modes of activation of latent human fibroblast collagenase: evidence for the role of a Cys73 active-site zinc complex in latency and a "cysteine switch" mechanism for activation Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 87 1990 364 368 2153297
200 Morgunova E. Tuuttila A. Bergmann U. Isupov M. Lindqvist Y. Schneider G. Structure of human pro-matrix metalloproteinase-2: activation mechanism revealed Science 284 1999 1667 1670 10356396
201 Ra H.J. Parks W.C. Control of matrix metalloproteinase catalytic activity Matrix Biol. 26 2007 587 596 17669641
202 Pei D. Weiss S.J. Furin-dependent intracellular activation of the human stromelysin-3 zymogen Nature 375 1995 244 247 7746327
203 Rosenblum G. Meroueh S. Toth M. Fisher J.F. Fridman R. Mobashery S. Molecular structures and dynamics of the stepwise activation mechanism of a matrix metalloproteinase zymogen: challenging the cysteine switch dogma J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129 2007 13566 13574 17929919
204 Nagase H. Enghild J.J. Suzuki K. Salvesen G. Stepwise activation mechanisms of the precursor of matrix metalloproteinase 3 (stromelysin) by proteinases and (4-aminophenyl) mercuric acetate Biochemistry 29 1990 5783 5789 2383557
205 Wong E. Maretzky T. Peleg Y. Blobel C.P. Sagi I. The functional maturation of a disintegrin and metalloproteinase (ADAM) 9, 10, and 17 requires processing at a newly identified proprotein convertase (PC) cleavage site J. Biol. Chem. 290 2015 12135 12146 25795784
206 Schlomann U. Wildeboer D. Webster A. Antropova O. Zeuschner D. Knight C.G. The metalloprotease disintegrin ADAM8: processing by autocatalysis is required for proteolytic activity and cell adhesion J. Biol. Chem. 277 2002 48210 48219 12372841
207 Loechel F. Overgaard M.T. Oxvig C. Albrechtsen R. Wewer U.M. Regulation of human ADAM 12 protease by the prodomain: evidence for a functional cysteine switch J. Biol. Chem. 274 1999 13427 13433 10224107
208 Gonzales P.E. Solomon A. Miller A.B. Leesnitzer M.A. Sagi I. Milla M.E. Inhibition of the tumor necrosis factor-α-converting enzyme by its pro domain J. Biol. Chem. 279 2004 31638 31645 15100227
209 Moss M.L. Bomar M. Liu Q. Sage H. Dempsey P. Lenhart P.M. The ADAM10 prodomain is a specific inhibitor of ADAM10 proteolytic activity and inhibits cellular shedding events J. Biol. Chem. 282 2007 35712 35721 17895248
210 Freer S. Kraut J. Robertus J. Wright H.T. Chymotrypsinogen: 2, 5-Å crystal structure, comparison with α-chymotrypsin, and implications for zymogen activation Biochemistry 9 1970 1997 2009 5442169
211 Fehlhammer H. Bode W. Huber R. Crystal structure of bovine trypsinogen at 1.8 Å resolution: II. Crystallographic refinement, refined crystal structure and comparison with bovine trypsin J. Mol. Biol. 111 1977 415 438 864704
212 Yoon H. Blaber S.I. Evans D.M. Trim J. Juliano M.A. Scarisbrick I.A. Activation profiles of human kallikrein-related peptidases by proteases of the thrombostasis axis Protein Sci. 17 2008 1998 2007 18697857
213 Wang L. Zhang C. Sun S. Chen Y. Hu Y. Wang H. Autoactivation and calpain-1-mediated shedding of hepsin in human hepatoma cells Biochem. J. 476 2019 2355 2369 31395734
214 Zhang Y. Sun S. Du C. Hu K. Zhang C. Liu M. Transmembrane serine protease TMPRSS2 implicated in SARS-CoV-2 infection is autoactivated intracellularly and requires N-glycosylation for regulation J. Biol. Chem. 298 2022 102643 36309092
215 Friis S. Sales K.U. Godiksen S. Peters D.E. Lin C.-Y. Vogel L.K. A matriptase-prostasin reciprocal zymogen activation complex with unique features: prostasin as a non-enzymatic co-factor for matriptase activation J. Biol. Chem. 288 2013 19028 19039 23673661
216 Su H.C. Liang Y.A. Lai Y.-J.J. Chiu Y.-L. Barndt R.B. Shiao F. Natural endogenous human matriptase and prostasin undergo zymogen activation via independent mechanisms in an uncoupled manner PLoS One 11 2016 e0167894
217 Cygler M. Sivaraman J. Grochulski P. Coulombe R. Storer A.C. Mort J.S. Structure of rat procathepsin B: model for inhibition of cysteine protease activity by the proregion Structure 4 1996 405 416 8740363
218 Coulombe R. Grochulski P. Sivaraman J. Menard R. Mort J. Cygler M. Structure of human procathepsin L reveals the molecular basis of inhibition by the prosegment EMBO J. 15 1996 5492 5503 8896443
219 Máša M. Marešová L. Vondrášek J. Horn M. Ježek J. Mareš M. Cathepsin D propeptide: mechanism and regulation of its interaction with the catalytic core Biochemistry 45 2006 15474 15482 17176069
220 Gieselmann V. Hasilik A. von Figura K. Processing of human cathepsin D in lysosomes in vitro J. Biol. Chem. 260 1985 3215 3220 3972822
221 Lee A.Y. Gulnik S.V. Erickson J.W. Conformational switching in an aspartic proteinase Nat. Struct. Biol. 5 1998 866 871 9783744
222 Hánová I. Brynda J. Houštecká R. Alam N. Sojka D. Kopáček P. Novel structural mechanism of allosteric regulation of aspartic peptidases via an evolutionarily conserved exosite Cell Chem. Biol. 25 2018 318 329.e314 29396291
223 Fortelny N. Cox J.H. Kappelhoff R. Starr A.E. Lange P.F. Pavlidis P. Network analyses reveal pervasive functional regulation between proteases in the human protease web PLoS Biol. 12 2014 e1001869 24865846
224 Strongin A.Y. Collier I. Bannikov G. Marmer B.L. Grant G.A. Goldberg G.I. Mechanism of cell surface activation of 72-kDa type IV collagenase. Isolation of the activated form of the membrane metalloprotease J. Biol. Chem. 270 1995 5331 5338 7890645
225 Morgunova E. Tuuttila A. Bergmann U. Tryggvason K. Structural insight into the complex formation of latent matrix metalloproteinase 2 with tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 2 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99 2002 7414 7419 12032297
226 Nakamura H. Ueno H. Yamashita K. Shimada T. Yamamoto E. Noguchi M. Enhanced production and activation of progelatinase A mediated by membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase in human papillary thyroid Carcinomas1 Cancer Res. 59 1999 467 473 9927064
227 Caglic D. Pungercar J.R. Pejler G. Turk V. Turk B. Glycosaminoglycans facilitate procathepsin B activation through disruption of propeptide-mature enzyme interactions J. Biol. Chem. 282 2007 33076 33085 17726009
228 Ra H.-J. Harju-Baker S. Zhang F. Linhardt R.J. Wilson C.L. Parks W.C. Control of promatrilysin (MMP7) activation and substrate-specific activity by sulfated glycosaminoglycans J. Biol. Chem. 284 2009 27924 27932 19654318
229 Fulcher Y.G. Sanganna Gari R.R. Frey N.C. Zhang F. Linhardt R.J. King G.M. Van Doren S.R. Heparinoids activate a protease, secreted by mucosa and tumors, via tethering supplemented by allostery ACS Chem. Biol. 9 2014 957 966 24495220
230 Fulcher Y.G. Prior S.H. Masuko S. Li L. Pu D. Zhang F. Glycan activation of a sheddase: electrostatic recognition between heparin and proMMP-7 Structure 25 2017 1100 1110.e1105 28648610
231 Tseng I.-C. Xu H. Chou F.-P. Li G. Vazzano A.P. Kao J.P. Matriptase activation, an early cellular response to acidosis J. Biol. Chem. 285 2010 3261 3270 19940125
232 Tseng C.-C. Jia B. Barndt R. Gu Y. Chen C.-Y. Tseng I.-C. Matriptase shedding is closely coupled with matriptase zymogen activation and requires de novo proteolytic cleavage likely involving its own activity PLoS One 12 2017 e0183507
233 Ji K. Mayernik L. Moin K. Sloane B.F. Acidosis and proteolysis in the tumor microenvironment Cancer Metastasis Rev. 38 2019 103 112 31069574
234 Jackson H.W. Defamie V. Waterhouse P. Khokha R. TIMPs: versatile extracellular regulators in cancer Nat. Rev. Cancer 17 2017 38 53 27932800
235 Gomis-Ruth F.X. Maskos K. Betz M. Bergner A. Huber R. Suzuki K. Mechanism of inhibition of the human matrix metalloproteinase stromelysin-1 by TIMP-1 Nature 389 1997 77 81 9288970
236 Troeberg L. Tanaka M. Wait R. Shi Y.E. Brew K. Nagase H. E. coli expression of TIMP-4 and comparative kinetic studies with TIMP-1 and TIMP-2: insights into the interactions of TIMPs and matrix metalloproteinase 2 (gelatinase A) Biochemistry 41 2002 15025 15035 12475252
237 Batra J. Soares A.S. Mehner C. Radisky E.S. Matrix metalloproteinase-10/TIMP-2 structure and analyses define conserved core interactions and diverse exosite interactions in MMP/TIMP complexes PLoS One 8 2013 e75836 24073280
238 Nozawa H. Chiu C. Hanahan D. Infiltrating neutrophils mediate the initial angiogenic switch in a mouse model of multistage carcinogenesis Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103 2006 12493 12498 16891410
239 Ardi V.C. Kupriyanova T.A. Deryugina E.I. Quigley J.P. Human neutrophils uniquely release TIMP-free MMP-9 to provide a potent catalytic stimulator of angiogenesis Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104 2007 20262 20267 18077379
240 Ardi V.C. Van den Steen P.E. Opdenakker G. Schweighofer B. Deryugina E.I. Quigley J.P. Neutrophil MMP-9 proenzyme, unencumbered by TIMP-1, undergoes efficient activation in vivo and catalytically induces angiogenesis via a basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF-2)/FGFR-2 pathway J. Biol. Chem. 284 2009 25854 25866 19608737
241 Bekes E.M. Schweighofer B. Kupriyanova T.A. Zajac E. Ardi V.C. Quigley J.P. Tumor-recruited neutrophils and neutrophil TIMP-free MMP-9 regulate coordinately the levels of tumor angiogenesis and efficiency of malignant cell intravasation Am. J. Pathol. 179 2011 1455 1470 21741942
242 Shimoda M. Principe S. Jackson H.W. Luga V. Fang H. Molyneux S.D. Loss of the Timp gene family is sufficient for the acquisition of the CAF-like cell state Nat. Cell Biol. 16 2014 889 901 25150980
243 Huntington J. Serpin structure, function and dysfunction J. Thromb. Haemost. 9 2011 26 34 21781239
244 Huntington J.A. Read R.J. Carrell R.W. Structure of a serpin–protease complex shows inhibition by deformation Nature 407 2000 923 926 11057674
245 Bode W. Huber R. Natural protein proteinase inhibitors and their interaction with proteinases Eur. J. Biochem. 204 1992 433 451 1541261
246 Radisky E.S. Koshland D.E. Jr. A clogged gutter mechanism for protease inhibitors Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99 2002 10316 10321 12142461
247 Zakharova E. Horvath M.P. Goldenberg D.P. Structure of a serine protease poised to resynthesize a peptide bond Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106 2009 11034 11039 19549826
248 Kayode O. Wang R. Pendlebury D.F. Cohen I. Henin R.D. Hockla A. An acrobatic substrate metamorphosis reveals a requirement for substrate conformational dynamics in trypsin proteolysis J. Biol. Chem. 291 2016 26304 26319 27810896
249 Nagel F. Palm G.J. Geist N. McDonnell T.C. Susemihl A. Girbardt B. Structural and biophysical insights into SPINK1 bound to human cationic trypsin Int. J. Mol. Sci. 23 2022 3468 35408828
250 Xu F. Previti M.L. Nieman M.T. Davis J. Schmaier A.H. Van Nostrand W.E. AβPP/APLP2 family of Kunitz serine proteinase inhibitors regulate cerebral thrombosis J. Neurosci. 29 2009 5666 5670 19403832
251 Canobbio I. Visconte C. Momi S. Guidetti G.F. Zara M. Canino J. Platelet amyloid precursor protein is a modulator of venous thromboembolism in mice Blood 130 2017 527 536 28611024
252 Broze G.J. Warren L.A. Novotny W.F. Higuchi D.A. Girard J.J. Miletich J.P. The lipoprotein-associated coagulation inhibitor that inhibits the factor VII-tissue factor complex also inhibits factor Xa: insight into its possible mechanism of action Blood 71 1988 335 343 3422166
253 Girard T.J. Warren L.A. Novotny W.F. Likert K.M. Brown S.G. Miletich J.P. Functional significance of the Kunitz-type inhibitory domains of lipoprotein-associated coagulation inhibitor Nature 338 1989 518 520 2927510
254 Petersen L.C. Sprecher C.A. Foster D.C. Blumberg H. Hamamoto T. Kisiel W. Inhibitory properties of a novel human Kunitz-type protease inhibitor homologous to tissue factor pathway inhibitor Biochemistry 35 1996 266 272 8555184
255 Kirchhofer D. Peek M. Lipari M.T. Billeci K. Fan B. Moran P. Hepsin activates pro-hepatocyte growth factor and is inhibited by hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor-1B (HAI-1B) and HAI-2 FEBS Lett. 579 2005 1945 1950 15792801
256 Szabo R. Hobson J.P. List K. Molinolo A. Lin C.-Y. Bugge T.H. Potent inhibition and global co-localization implicate the transmembrane kunitz-type serine protease inhibitor hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor-2 in the regulation of epithelial matriptase activity J. Biol. Chem. 283 2008 29495 29504 18713750
257 Friis S. Sales K.U. Schafer J.M. Vogel L.K. Kataoka H. Bugge T.H. The protease inhibitor HAI-2, but not HAI-1, regulates matriptase activation and shedding through prostasin J. Biol. Chem. 289 2014 22319 22332 24962579
258 Ko C.-J. Hsu T.-W. Wu S.-R. Lan S.-W. Hsiao T.-F. Lin H.-Y. Inhibition of TMPRSS2 by HAI-2 reduces prostate cancer cell invasion and metastasis Oncogene 39 2020 5950 5963 32778768
259 Kubala M.H. DeClerck Y.A. The plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 paradox in cancer: a mechanistic understanding Cancer Metastasis Rev. 38 2019 483 492 31734763
260 Mehner C. Radisky E.S. Bad tumors made worse: SPINK1 Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 7 2019 10 30778387
261 Bergum C. List K. Loss of the matriptase inhibitor HAI-2 during prostate cancer progression Prostate 70 2010 1422 1428 20687215
262 Tsai C.H. Teng C.H. Tu Y.T. Cheng T.S. Wu S.R. Ko C.J. HAI-2 suppresses the invasive growth and metastasis of prostate cancer through regulation of matriptase Oncogene 33 2014 4643 4652 24121274
263 Morris M.R. Gentle D. Abdulrahman M. Maina E.N. Gupta K. Banks R.E. Tumor suppressor activity and epigenetic inactivation of hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor type 2/SPINT2 in papillary and clear cell renal cell carcinoma Cancer Res. 65 2005 4598 4606 15930277
264 Renko M. Požgan U. Majera D. Turk D. Stefin A displaces the occluding loop of cathepsin B only by as much as required to bind to the active site cleft FEBS J. 277 2010 4338 4345 20860624
265 Nycander M. Estrada S. Mort J.S. Abrahamson M. Björk I. Two-step mechanism of inhibition of cathepsin B by cystatin C due to displacement of the proteinase occluding loop FEBS Lett. 422 1998 61 64 9475170
266 Pavlova A. Krupa J.C. Mort J.S. Abrahamson M. Björk I. Cystatin inhibition of cathepsin B requires dislocation of the proteinase occluding loop. Demonstration by release of loop anchoring through mutation of His110 FEBS Lett. 487 2000 156 160 11150500
267 Breznik B. Mitrović A. T. Lah T. Kos J. Cystatins in cancer progression: more than just cathepsin inhibitors Biochimie 166 2019 233 250 31071357
268 Linder S. Cervero P. Eddy R. Condeelis J. Mechanisms and roles of podosomes and invadopodia Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 24 2023 86 106 36104625
269 Infante E. Castagnino A. Ferrari R. Monteiro P. Agüera-González S. Paul-Gilloteaux P. LINC complex-Lis1 interplay controls MT1-MMP matrix digest-on-demand response for confined tumor cell migration Nat. Commun. 9 2018 2443 29934494
270 Ferrari R. Martin G.l. Tagit O. Guichard A. Cambi A. Voituriez R.l. MT1-MMP directs force-producing proteolytic contacts that drive tumor cell invasion Nat. Commun. 10 2019 4886 31653854
271 Clancy J.W. Sedgwick A. Rosse C. Muralidharan-Chari V. Raposo G. Method M. Regulated delivery of molecular cargo to invasive tumour-derived microvesicles Nat. Commun. 6 2015 6919 25897521
272 Monsky W.L. Kelly T. Lin C.-Y. Yeh Y. Stetler-Stevenson W.G. Mueller S.C. Binding and localization of Mr 72,000 matrix metalloproteinase at cell surface invadopodia Cancer Res. 53 1993 3159 3164 8391388
273 Kindzelskii A.L. Amhad I. Keller D. Zhou M.-J. Haugland R.P. Garni-Wagner B. Pericellular proteolysis by leukocytes and tumor cells on substrates: focal activation and the role of urokinase-type plasminogen activator Histochem. Cell Biol. 121 2004 299 310 15042374
274 Tu C. Ortega-Cava C.F. Chen G. Fernandes N.D. Cavallo-Medved D. Sloane B.F. Lysosomal cathepsin B participates in the podosome-mediated extracellular matrix degradation and invasion via secreted lysosomes in v-Src fibroblasts Cancer Res. 68 2008 9147 9156 19010886
275 Murphy G. Nagase H. Localizing matrix metalloproteinase activities in the pericellular environment FEBS J. 278 2011 2 15 21087456
276 Haining E.J. Yang J. Bailey R.L. Khan K. Collier R. Tsai S. The TspanC8 subgroup of tetraspanins interacts with A disintegrin and metalloprotease 10 (ADAM10) and regulates its maturation and cell surface expression J. Biol. Chem. 287 2012 39753 39765 23035126
277 Jouannet S. Saint-Pol J. Fernandez L. Nguyen V. Charrin S. Boucheix C. TspanC8 tetraspanins differentially regulate the cleavage of ADAM10 substrates, Notch activation and ADAM10 membrane compartmentalization Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 73 2016 1895 1915 26686862
278 Matthews A.L. Szyroka J. Collier R. Noy P.J. Tomlinson M.G. Scissor sisters: regulation of ADAM10 by the TspanC8 tetraspanins Biochem. Soc. Trans. 45 2017 719 730 28620033
279 Adrain C. Zettl M. Christova Y. Taylor N. Freeman M. Tumor necrosis factor signaling requires iRhom2 to promote trafficking and activation of TACE. Science 335 2012 225 228 22246777
280 Maretzky T. McIlwain D.R. Issuree P.D.A. Li X. Malapeira J. Amin S. iRhom2 controls the substrate selectivity of stimulated ADAM17-dependent ectodomain shedding Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110 2013 11433 11438 23801765
281 Li X. Maretzky T. Weskamp G. Monette S. Qing X. Issuree P.D.A. iRhoms 1 and 2 are essential upstream regulators of ADAM17-dependent EGFR signaling Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112 2015 6080 6085 25918388
282 Müller M. Saunders C. Senftleben A. Heidbuechel J.P.W. Halwachs B. Bolik J. Tetraspanin 8 subfamily members regulate substrate-specificity of a disintegrin and metalloprotease 17 Cells 11 2022 2683 36078095
283 Bourguignon L.Y. Gunja-Smith Z. Iida N. Zhu H.B. Young L.J. Muller W.J. CD44v(3,8-10) is involved in cytoskeleton-mediated tumor cell migration and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP-9) association in metastatic breast cancer cells J. Cell Physiol. 176 1998 206 215 9618160
284 Yu Q. Stamenkovic I. Localization of matrix metalloproteinase 9 to the cell surface provides a mechanism for CD44-mediated tumor invasion Genes Dev. 13 1999 35 48 9887098
285 Redondo-Munoz J. Ugarte-Berzal E. Garcia-Marco J.A. del Cerro M.H. Van den Steen P.E. Opdenakker G. Alpha4beta1 integrin and 190-kDa CD44v constitute a cell surface docking complex for gelatinase B/MMP-9 in chronic leukemic but not in normal B cells Blood 112 2008 169 178 18326820
286 Mai J. Finley R.L. Waisman D.M. Sloane B.F. Human procathepsin B interacts with the annexin II tetramer on the surface of tumor cells J. Biol. Chem. 275 2000 12806 12812 10777578
287 Van Doren S.R. Marcink T.C. Koppisetti R.K. Jurkevich A. Fulcher Y.G. Peripheral membrane associations of matrix metalloproteinases Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Cell Res. 1864 2017 1964 1973 28442379
288 Yamamoto K. Higashi S. Kioi M. Tsunezumi J. Honke K. Miyazaki K. Binding of active matrilysin to cell surface cholesterol sulfate is essential for its membrane-associated proteolytic action and induction of homotypic cell adhesion J. Biol. Chem. 281 2006 9170 9180 16476739
289 Yamamoto K. Miyazaki K. Higashi S. Cholesterol sulfate alters substrate preference of matrix metalloproteinase-7 and promotes degradations of pericellular laminin-332 and fibronectin J. Biol. Chem. 285 2010 28862 28873 20605794
290 Prior S.H. Fulcher Y.G. Koppisetti R.K. Jurkevich A. Van Doren S.R. Charge-triggered membrane insertion of matrix metalloproteinase-7, supporter of innate immunity and tumors Structure 23 2015 2099 2110 26439767
291 Sameni M. Elliott E. Ziegler G. Fortgens P.H. Dennison C. Sloane B.F. Cathepsin B and D are localized at the surface of human breast cancer cells Pathol. Oncol. Res. 1 1995 43 11173567
292 Itoh Y. Ito N. Nagase H. Evans R.D. Bird S.A. Seiki M. Cell surface collagenolysis requires homodimerization of the membrane-bound collagenase MT1-MMP Mol. Biol. Cell 17 2006 5390 5399 17050733
293 Itoh Y. Palmisano R. Anilkumar N. Nagase H. Miyawaki A. Seiki M. Dimerization of MT1-MMP during cellular invasion detected by fluorescence resonance energy transfer Biochem. J. 440 2011 319 327 21846327
294 Xu P. Liu J. Sakaki-Yumoto M. Derynck R. TACE activation by MAPK-mediated regulation of cell surface dimerization and TIMP3 association Sci. Signal. 5 2012 ra34 22550340
295 Vandooren J. Born B. Solomonov I. Zajac E. Saldova R. Senske M. Circular trimers of gelatinase B/matrix metalloproteinase-9 constitute a distinct population of functional enzyme molecules differentially regulated by tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 Biochem. J. 465 2015 259 270 25360794
296 Serifova X. Ugarte-Berzal E. Opdenakker G. Vandooren J. Homotrimeric MMP-9 is an active hitchhiker on alpha-2-macroglobulin partially escaping protease inhibition and internalization through LRP-1 Cell Mol. Life Sci. 77 2020 3013 3026 31642940
297 Cools-Lartigue J. Spicer J. McDonald B. Gowing S. Chow S. Giannias B. Neutrophil extracellular traps sequester circulating tumor cells and promote metastasis J. Clin. Invest. 123 2013 3446 3458 23863628
298 Winkler J. Abisoye-Ogunniyan A. Metcalf K.J. Werb Z. Concepts of extracellular matrix remodelling in tumour progression and metastasis Nat. Commun. 11 2020 5120 33037194
299 Ota I. Li X.Y. Hu Y. Weiss S.J. Induction of a MT1-MMP and MT2-MMP-dependent basement membrane transmigration program in cancer cells by Snail1 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106 2009 20318 20323 19915148
300 Lodillinsky C. Infante E. Guichard A. Chaligne R. Fuhrmann L. Cyrta J. p63/MT1-MMP axis is required for in situ to invasive transition in basal-like breast cancer Oncogene 35 2016 344 357 25893299
301 Amar S. Smith L. Fields G.B. Matrix metalloproteinase collagenolysis in health and disease Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Cell Res. 1864 2017 1940 1951 28456643
302 Solomonov I. Zehorai E. Talmi-Frank D. Wolf S.G. Shainskaya A. Zhuravlev A. Distinct biological events generated by ECM proteolysis by two homologous collagenases Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 113 2016 10884 10889 27630193
303 Beliveau A. Mott J.D. Lo A. Chen E.I. Koller A.A. Yaswen P. Raf-induced MMP9 disrupts tissue architecture of human breast cells in three-dimensional culture and is necessary for tumor growth in vivo Genes Dev. 24 2010 2800 2811 21159820
304 Tripathi M. Nandana S. Yamashita H. Ganesan R. Kirchhofer D. Quaranta V. Laminin-332 is a substrate for hepsin, a protease associated with prostate cancer progression J. Biol. Chem. 283 2008 30576 30584 18784072
305 Tervonen T.A. Belitškin D. Pant S.M. Englund J.I. Marques E. Ala-Hongisto H. Deregulated hepsin protease activity confers oncogenicity by concomitantly augmenting HGF/MET signalling and disrupting epithelial cohesion Oncogene 35 2016 1832 1846 26165838
306 Ko C.-J. Huang C.-C. Lin H.-Y. Juan C.-P. Lan S.-W. Shyu H.-Y. Androgen-induced TMPRSS2 activates matriptase and promotes extracellular matrix degradation, prostate cancer cell invasion, tumor growth, and metastasis Cancer Res. 75 2015 2949 2960 26018085
307 Good D.J. Polverini P.J. Rastinejad F. Le Beau M.M. Lemons R.S. Frazier W.A. A tumor suppressor-dependent inhibitor of angiogenesis is immunologically and functionally indistinguishable from a fragment of thrombospondin Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 87 1990 6624 6628 1697685
308 Catena R. Bhattacharya N. El Rayes T. Wang S. Choi H. Gao D. Bone marrow–derived Gr1+ cells can generate a metastasis-resistant microenvironment via induced secretion of thrombospondin-1 Cancer Discov. 3 2013 578 589 23633432
309 Giannelli G. Falk-Marzillier J. Schiraldi O. Stetler-Stevenson W.G. Quaranta V. Induction of cell migration by matrix metalloprotease-2 cleavage of laminin-5 Science 277 1997 225 228 9211848
310 Udayakumar T.S. Chen M.L. Bair E.L. Von Bredow D.C. Cress A.E. Nagle R.B. Membrane type-1-matrix metalloproteinase expressed by prostate carcinoma cells cleaves human laminin-5 β3 chain and induces cell migration Cancer Res. 63 2003 2292 2299 12727852
311 Tripathi M. Potdar A.A. Yamashita H. Weidow B. Cummings P.T. Kirchhofer D. Laminin-332 cleavage by matriptase alters motility parameters of prostate cancer cells Prostate 71 2011 184 196 20672321
312 Schenk S. Hintermann E. Bilban M. Koshikawa N. Hojilla C. Khokha R. Binding to EGF receptor of a laminin-5 EGF-like fragment liberated during MMP-dependent mammary gland involution J. Cell Biol. 161 2003 197 209 12695504
313 Carminati L. Carlessi E. Longhi E. Taraboletti G. Controlled extracellular proteolysis of thrombospondins Matrix Biol. 119 2023 82 100 37003348
314 Taraboletti G. Morbidelli L. Donnini S. Parenti A. Granger H.J. Giavazzi R. The heparin binding 25 kDa fragment of thrombospondin-1 promotes angiogenesis and modulates gelatinase and TIMP-2 production in endothelial cells FASEB J. 14 2000 1674 1676 10973914
315 do Outeiro-Bernstein M.A.F. Nunes S.S. Andrade A.C.M. Alves T.R. Legrand C. Morandi V. A recombinant NH2-terminal heparin-binding domain of the adhesive glycoprotein, thrombospondin-1, promotes endothelial tube formation and cell survival: a possible role for syndecan-4 proteoglycan Matrix Biol. 21 2002 311 324 12128069
316 Esteban S. Clemente C. Koziol A. Gonzalo P. Rius C. Martínez F. Endothelial MT 1-MMP targeting limits intussusceptive angiogenesis and colitis via TSP1/nitric oxide axis EMBO Mol. Med. 12 2020 e10862 31793743
317 Robertson I.B. Rifkin D.B. Unchaining the beast; insights from structural and evolutionary studies on TGFβ secretion, sequestration, and activation Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 24 2013 355 372 23849989
318 Jenkins G. The role of proteases in transforming growth factor-β activation Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 40 2008 1068 1078 18243766
319 Yu Q. Stamenkovic I. Cell surface-localized matrix metalloproteinase-9 proteolytically activates TGF-beta and promotes tumor invasion and angiogenesis Genes Dev. 14 2000 163 176 10652271
320 Dallas S.L. Rosser J.L. Mundy G.R. Bonewald L.F. Proteolysis of latent transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta)-binding protein-1 by osteoclasts. A cellular mechanism for release of TGF-beta from bone matrix J. Biol. Chem. 277 2002 21352 21360 11929865
321 Tatti O. Vehviläinen P. Lehti K. Keski-Oja J. MT1-MMP releases latent TGF-β1 from endothelial cell extracellular matrix via proteolytic processing of LTBP-1 Exp. Cell Res. 314 2008 2501 2514 18602101
322 Belitškin D. Pant S.M. Munne P. Suleymanova I. Belitškina K. Hongisto H.A. Hepsin regulates TGFβ signaling via fibronectin proteolysis EMBO Rep. 22 2021 e52532 34515392
323 Houck K.A. Leung D. Rowland A. Winer J. Ferrara N. Dual regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor bioavailability by genetic and proteolytic mechanisms J. Biol. Chem. 267 1992 26031 26037 1464614
324 Lee S. Jilani S.M. Nikolova G.V. Carpizo D. Iruela-Arispe M.L. Processing of VEGF-A by matrix metalloproteinases regulates bioavailability and vascular patterning in tumors J. Cell Biol. 169 2005 681 691 15911882
325 Bergers G. Brekken R. McMahon G. Vu T.H. Itoh T. Tamaki K. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 triggers the angiogenic switch during carcinogenesis Nat. Cell Biol. 2 2000 737 744 11025665
326 Giraudo E. Inoue M. Hanahan D. An amino-bisphosphonate targets MMP-9–expressing macrophages and angiogenesis to impair cervical carcinogenesis J. Clin. Invest. 114 2004 623 633 15343380
327 Saksela O. Rifkin D.B. Release of basic fibroblast growth factor-heparan sulfate complexes from endothelial cells by plasminogen activator-mediated proteolytic activity J. Cell Biol. 110 1990 767 775 2137829
328 Akl M.R. Nagpal P. Ayoub N.M. Tai B. Prabhu S.A. Capac C.M. Molecular and clinical significance of fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2/bFGF) in malignancies of solid and hematological cancers for personalized therapies Oncotarget 7 2016 44735 27007053
329 Yu P.-J. Ferrari G. Pirelli L. Galloway A.C. Mignatti P. Pintucci G. Thrombin cleaves the high molecular weight forms of basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF-2): a novel mechanism for the control of FGF-2 and thrombin activity Oncogene 27 2008 2594 2601 17968311
330 Linossi E.M. Estevam G.O. Oshima M. Fraser J.S. Collisson E.A. Jura N. State of the structure address on MET receptor activation by HGF Biochem. Soc. Trans. 49 2021 645 661 33860789
331 Fu J. Su X. Li Z. Deng L. Liu X. Feng X. HGF/c-MET pathway in cancer: from molecular characterization to clinical evidence Oncogene 40 2021 4625 4651 34145400
332 Yao H.-P. Zhou Y.-Q. Zhang R. Wang M.-H. MSP–RON signalling in cancer: pathogenesis and therapeutic potential Nat. Rev. Cancer 13 2013 466 481 23792360
333 Bhatt A.S. Welm A. Farady C.J. Vásquez M. Wilson K. Craik C.S. Coordinate expression and functional profiling identify an extracellular proteolytic signaling pathway Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104 2007 5771 5776 17389401
334 Ganesan R. Kolumam G.A. Lin S.J. Xie M.-H. Santell L. Wu T.D. Proteolytic activation of pro-macrophage-stimulating protein by Hepsin Activation of pro-MSP by hepsin Mol. Cancer Res. 9 2011 1175 1186 21875933
335 Li X. Pontén A. Aase K. Karlsson L. Abramsson A. Uutela M. PDGF-C is a new protease-activated ligand for the PDGF α-receptor Nat. Cell Biol. 2 2000 302 309 10806482
336 Bergsten E. Uutela M. Li X. Pietras K. Östman A. Heldin C.-H. PDGF-D is a specific, protease-activated ligand for the PDGF β-receptor Nat. Cell Biol. 3 2001 512 516 11331881
337 Fredriksson L. Li H. Fieber C. Li X. Eriksson U. Tissue plasminogen activator is a potent activator of PDGF-CC EMBO J. 23 2004 3793 3802 15372073
338 Hurst N.J. Jr. Najy A.J. Ustach C.V. Movilla L. Kim H.-R.C. Platelet-derived growth factor-C (PDGF-C) activation by serine proteases: implications for breast cancer progression Biochem. J. 441 2012 909 919 22035541
339 Turrell F.K. Orha R. Guppy N.J. Gillespie A. Guelbert M. Starling C. Age-associated microenvironmental changes highlight the role of PDGF-C in ER+ breast cancer metastatic relapse Nat. Cancer 4 2023 468 484 36914817
340 Ustach C.V. Kim H.-R.C. Platelet-derived growth factor D is activated by urokinase plasminogen activator in prostate carcinoma cells Mol. Cell Biol. 25 2005 6279 6288 15988036
341 Ustach C.V. Huang W. Conley-LaComb M.K. Lin C.Y. Che M. Abrams J. A novel signaling axis of matriptase/PDGF-D/ss-PDGFR in human prostate cancer Cancer Res. 70 2010 9631 9640 21098708
342 Van den Steen P.E. Proost P. Wuyts A. Van Damme J. Opdenakker G. Neutrophil gelatinase B potentiates interleukin-8 tenfold by aminoterminal processing, whereas it degrades CTAP-III, PF-4, and GRO-α and leaves RANTES and MCP-2 intact Blood 96 2000 2673 2681 11023497
343 Waugh D.J.J. Wilson C. The interleukin-8 pathway in cancer Clin. Cancer Res. 14 2008 6735 6741 18980965
344 Schneider M.R. Wolf E. The epidermal growth factor receptor ligands at a glance J. Cell Physiol. 218 2009 460 466 19006176
345 Gnosa S.P. Blasco L.P. Piotrowski K.B. Freiberg M.L. Savickas S. Madsen D.H. ADAM17-mediated EGFR ligand shedding directs macrophage-promoted cancer cell invasion JCI Insight. 7 2022 e155296 35998057
346 Lynch C.C. Vargo-Gogola T. Martin M.D. Fingleton B. Crawford H.C. Matrisian L.M. Matrix metalloproteinase 7 mediates mammary epithelial cell tumorigenesis through the ErbB4 receptor Cancer Res. 67 2007 6760 6767 17638887
347 Lynch C.C. Hikosaka A. Acuff H.B. Martin M.D. Kawai N. Singh R.K. MMP-7 promotes prostate cancer-induced osteolysis via the solubilization of RANKL Cancer Cell 7 2005 485 496 15894268
348 Sabbota A.L. Kim H.-R.C. Zhe X. Fridman R. Bonfil R.D. Cher M.L. Shedding of RANKL by tumor-associated MT1-MMP activates Src-dependent prostate cancer cell migration Cancer Res. 70 2010 5558 5566 20551048
349 Peach C.J. Edgington-Mitchell L.E. Bunnett N.W. Schmidt B.L. Protease-activated receptors in health and disease Physiol. Rev. 103 2023 717 785 35901239
350 Schweickert P.G. Yang Y. White E.E. Cresswell G.M. Elzey B.D. Ratliff T.L. Thrombin-PAR1 signaling in pancreatic cancer promotes an immunosuppressive microenvironment J. Thromb. Haemost. 19 2021 161 172 33064371
351 Trivedi V. Boire A. Tchernychev B. Kaneider N.C. Leger A.J. O'Callaghan K. Platelet matrix metalloprotease-1 mediates thrombogenesis by activating PAR1 at a cryptic ligand site Cell 137 2009 332 343 19379698
352 Pawar N.R. Buzza M.S. Antalis T.M. Membrane-anchored serine proteases and protease-activated receptor-2–mediated signaling: Co-conspirators in cancer progression Cancer Res. 79 2019 301 310 30610085
353 Ohta T. Shimizu K. Yi S. Takamura H. Amaya K. Kitagawa H. Protease-activated receptor-2 expression and the role of trypsin in cell proliferation in human pancreatic cancers Int. J. Oncol. 23 2003 61 66 12792776
354 Kim K.K. Turner R. Khazan N. Kodza A. Jones A. Singh R.K. Role of trypsin and protease-activated receptor-2 in ovarian cancer PLoS One 15 2020 e0232253
355 Camerer E. Barker A. Duong D.N. Ganesan R. Kataoka H. Cornelissen I. Local protease signaling contributes to neural tube closure in the mouse embryo Dev. Cell 18 2010 25 38 20152175
356 Bocheva G. Rattenholl A. Kempkes C. Goerge T. Lin C.-Y. D'andrea M.R. Role of matriptase and proteinase-activated receptor-2 in nonmelanoma skin cancer J. Invest. Dermatol. 129 2009 1816 1823 19242518
357 Pawar N.R. Buzza M.S. Duru N. Strong A.A. Antalis T.M. Matriptase drives dissemination of ovarian cancer spheroids by a PAR-2/PI3K/Akt/MMP9 signaling axis J. Cell Biol. 222 2023 e202209114
358 Kanemaru A. Yamamoto K. Kawaguchi M. Fukushima T. Lin C.Y. Johnson M.D. Deregulated matriptase activity in oral squamous cell carcinoma promotes the infiltration of cancer-associated fibroblasts by paracrine activation of protease-activated receptor 2 Int. J. Cancer 140 2017 130 141 27615543
359 Sugiyama N. Gucciardo E. Tatti O. Varjosalo M. Hyytiäinen M. Gstaiger M. EphA2 cleavage by MT1-MMP triggers single cancer cell invasion via homotypic cell repulsion J. Cell Biol. 201 2013 467 484 23629968
360 Koshikawa N. Hoshino D. Taniguchi H. Minegishi T. Tomari T. Nam S.-O. Proteolysis of EphA2 converts it from a tumor suppressor to an oncoprotein Cancer Res. 75 2015 3327 3339 26130649
361 Brown T.A. Yang T.M. Zaitsevskaia T. Xia Y. Dunn C.A. Sigle R.O. Adhesion or plasmin regulates tyrosine phosphorylation of a novel membrane glycoprotein p80/gp140/CUB domain-containing protein 1 in epithelia J. Biol. Chem. 279 2004 14772 14783 14739293
362 He Y. Wortmann A. Burke L.J. Reid J.C. Adams M.N. Abdul-Jabbar I. Proteolysis-induced N-terminal ectodomain shedding of the integral membrane glycoprotein CUB domain-containing protein 1 (CDCP1) is accompanied by tyrosine phosphorylation of its C-terminal domain and recruitment of Src and PKCdelta J. Biol. Chem. 285 2010 26162 26173 20551327
363 Khan T. Kryza T. Lyons N.J. He Y. Hooper J.D. The CDCP1 signaling hub: a target for cancer detection and therapeutic intervention Cancer Res. 81 2021 2259 2269 33509939
364 Casar B. He Y. Iconomou M. Hooper J.D. Quigley J.P. Deryugina E.I. Blocking of CDCP1 cleavage in vivo prevents Akt-dependent survival and inhibits metastatic colonization through PARP1-mediated apoptosis of cancer cells Oncogene 31 2012 3924 3938 22179830
365 Casar B. Rimann I. Kato H. Shattil S.J. Quigley J.P. Deryugina E.I. In vivo cleaved CDCP1 promotes early tumor dissemination via complexing with activated β1 integrin and induction of FAK/PI3K/Akt motility signaling Oncogene 33 2014 255 268 23208492
366 Wright H.J. Arulmoli J. Motazedi M. Nelson L.J. Heinemann F.S. Flanagan L.A. CDCP1 cleavage is necessary for homodimerization-induced migration of triple-negative breast cancer Oncogene 35 2016 4762 4772 26876198
367 Kryza T. Khan T. Lovell S. Harrington B.S. Yin J. Porazinski S. Substrate-biased activity-based probes identify proteases that cleave receptor CDCP1 Nat. Chem. Biol. 17 2021 776 783 33859413
368 Najy A.J. Day K.C. Day M.L. The ectodomain shedding of E-cadherin by ADAM15 supports ErbB receptor activation J. Biol. Chem. 283 2008 18393 18401 18434311
369 Klucky B. Mueller R. Vogt I. Teurich S. Hartenstein B. Breuhahn K. Kallikrein 6 induces E-cadherin shedding and promotes cell proliferation, migration, and invasion Cancer Res. 67 2007 8198 8206 17804733
370 Wadhawan V. Kolhe Y.A. Sangith N. Gautam A.K. Venkatraman P. From prediction to experimental validation: desmoglein 2 is a functionally relevant substrate of matriptase in epithelial cells and their reciprocal relationship is important for cell adhesion Biochem. J. 447 2012 61 70 22783993
371 Ramos-DeSimone N. Hahn-Dantona E. Sipley J. Nagase H. French D.L. Quigley J.P. Activation of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) via a converging plasmin/stromelysin-1 cascade enhances tumor cell invasion J. Biol. Chem. 274 1999 13066 13076 10224058
372 Wilkins-Port C.E. Ye Q. Mazurkiewicz J.E. Higgins P.J. TGF-β1+ EGF-Initiated invasive potential in transformed human keratinocytes is coupled to a Plasmin/MMP-10/MMP-1–Dependent collagen remodeling Axis: role for PAI-1 Cancer Res. 69 2009 4081 4091 19383899
373 Kobayashi H. Moniwa N. Sugimura M. Shinohara H. Ohi H. Terao T. Effects of membrane-associated cathepsin B on the activation of receptor-bound prourokinase and subsequent invasion of reconstituted basement membranes Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Cell Res. 1178 1993 55 62
374 Itoh Y. Nagase H. Preferential inactivation of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 that is bound to the precursor of matrix metalloproteinase 9 (Progelatinase B) by human neutrophil elastase J. Biol. Chem. 270 1995 16518 16521 7622455
375 Kostoulas G. Lang A. Nagase H. Baici A. Stimulation of angiogenesis through cathepsin B inactivation of the tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases FEBS Lett. 455 1999 286 290 10437790
376 Dean R.A. Overall C.M. Proteomics discovery of metalloproteinase substrates in the cellular context by iTRAQ™ labeling reveals a diverse MMP-2 substrate degradome Mol. Cell Proteomics 6 2007 611 623 17200105
377 Alloy A.P. Kayode O. Wang R. Hockla A. Soares A.S. Radisky E.S. Mesotrypsin has evolved four unique residues to cleave trypsin inhibitors as substrates J. Biol. Chem. 290 2015 21523 21535 26175157
378 Szmola R. Kukor Z. Sahin-Tóth M. Human mesotrypsin is a unique digestive protease specialized for the degradation of trypsin inhibitors J. Biol. Chem. 278 2003 48580 48589 14507909
379 Canbay V. Auf dem Keller U. New strategies to identify protease substrates Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 60 2021 89 96 33220627
380 Savickas S. Kastl P. Auf dem Keller U. Combinatorial degradomics: precision tools to unveil proteolytic processes in biological systems Biochim. Biophys. Acta Proteins Proteom. 1868 2020 140392 32087360
381 Kleifeld O. Doucet A. auf dem Keller U. Prudova A. Schilling O. Kainthan R.K. Isotopic labeling of terminal amines in complex samples identifies protein N-termini and protease cleavage products Nat. Biotechnol. 28 2010 281 288 20208520
382 Gevaert K. Goethals M. Martens L. Van Damme J. Staes A. Thomas G.R. Exploring proteomes and analyzing protein processing by mass spectrometric identification of sorted N-terminal peptides Nat. Biotechnol. 21 2003 566 569 12665801
383 Mahrus S. Trinidad J.C. Barkan D.T. Sali A. Burlingame A.L. Wells J.A. Global sequencing of proteolytic cleavage sites in apoptosis by specific labeling of protein N termini Cell 134 2008 866 876 18722006
384 Weeks A.M. Byrnes J.R. Lui I. Wells J.A. Mapping proteolytic neo-N termini at the surface of living cells Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 118 2021 e2018809118
385 Schaefer K. Lui I. Byrnes J.R. Kang E. Zhou J. Weeks A.M. Direct identification of proteolytic cleavages on living cells using a glycan-tethered peptide ligase ACS Cent. Sci. 8 2022 1447 1456 36313159
386 Herber J. Njavro J. Feederle R. Schepers U. Müller U.C. Bräse S. Click chemistry-mediated biotinylation reveals a function for the protease BACE1 in modulating the neuronal surface glycoproteome Mol. Cell Proteomics 17 2018 1487 1501 29716987
387 Calligaris M. Yang C.Y. Bonelli S. Spanò D.P. Müller S.A. Lichtenthaler S.F. Identification of membrane proteins regulated by ADAM15 by SUSPECS proteomics Front. Mol. Biosciences 10 2023 1162504
388 Tang S. Beattie A.T. Kafkova L. Petris G. Huguenin-Dezot N. Fiedler M. Mechanism-based traps enable protease and hydrolase substrate discovery Nature 602 2022 701 707 35173328
389 Schlage P. Egli F.E. Nanni P. Wang L.W. Kizhakkedathu J.N. Apte S.S. Time-resolved analysis of the matrix metalloproteinase 10 substrate degradome Mol. Cell Proteomics 13 2014 580 593 24281761
390 Nomura D.K. Dix M.M. Cravatt B.F. Activity-based protein profiling for biochemical pathway discovery in cancer Nat. Rev. Cancer 10 2010 630 638 20703252
391 Cravatt B.F. Wright A.T. Kozarich J.W. Activity-based protein profiling: from enzyme chemistry to proteomic chemistry Annu. Rev. Biochem. 77 2008 383 414 18366325
392 Jessani N. Liu Y. Humphrey M. Cravatt B.F. Enzyme activity profiles of the secreted and membrane proteome that depict cancer cell invasiveness Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99 2002 10335 10340 12149457
393 Jessani N. Humphrey M. McDonald W.H. Niessen S. Masuda K. Gangadharan B. Carcinoma and stromal enzyme activity profiles associated with breast tumor growth in vivo Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101 2004 13756 13761 15356343
394 Nury C. Czarny B. Cassar-Lajeunesse E. Georgiadis D. Bregant S. Dive V. A Pan photoaffinity probe for detecting active forms of matrix metalloproteinases ChemBioChem 14 2013 107 114 23203916
395 Kaminska M. Bruyat P. Malgorn C. Doladilhe M. Cassar-Lajeunesse E. Fruchart Gaillard C. Ligand-directed modification of active matrix metalloproteases: activity-based probes with no photolabile group Angew. Chem. 133 2021 18420 18427
396 Bregant S. Huillet C.l. Devel L. Dabert-Gay A.-S. Beau F. Thai R. Detection of matrix metalloproteinase active forms in complex proteomes: evaluation of affinity versus photoaffinity capture J. Proteome Res. 8 2009 2484 2494 19271733
397 Joyce J.A. Baruch A. Chehade K. Meyer-Morse N. Giraudo E. Tsai F.-Y. Cathepsin cysteine proteases are effectors of invasive growth and angiogenesis during multistage tumorigenesis Cancer Cell 5 2004 443 453 15144952
398 Mehner C. Hockla A. Coban M. Madden B. Estrada R. Radisky D.C. Activity-based protein profiling reveals active serine proteases that drive malignancy of human ovarian clear cell carcinoma J. Biol. Chem. 298 2022 102146 35716777
399 Faucher F. Bennett J.M. Bogyo M. Lovell S. Strategies for tuning the selectivity of chemical probes that target serine hydrolases Cell Chem. Biol. 27 2020 937 952 32726586
400 Damalanka V.C. Han Z. Karmakar P. O’Donoghue A.J. La Greca F. Kim T. Discovery of selective matriptase and hepsin serine protease inhibitors: useful chemical tools for cancer cell biology J. Med. Chem. 62 2018 480 490
401 Kasperkiewicz P. Poreba M. Groborz K. Drag M. Emerging challenges in the design of selective substrates, inhibitors and activity-based probes for indistinguishable proteases FEBS J. 284 2017 1518 1539 28052575
402 Kasperkiewicz P. Altman Y. D’Angelo M. Salvesen G.S. Drag M. Toolbox of fluorescent probes for parallel imaging reveals uneven location of serine proteases in neutrophils J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139 2017 10115 10125 28672107
403 Kasperkiewicz P. Poreba M. Snipas S.J. Parker H. Winterbourn C.C. Salvesen G.S. Design of ultrasensitive probes for human neutrophil elastase through hybrid combinatorial substrate library profiling Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111 2014 2518 2523 24550277
404 Chen S. Lovell S. Lee S. Fellner M. Mace P.D. Bogyo M. Identification of highly selective covalent inhibitors by phage display Nat. Biotechnol. 39 2021 490 498 33199876
405 Xiao J. Broz P. Puri A.W. Deu E. Morell M. Monack D.M. A coupled protein and probe engineering approach for selective inhibition and activity-based probe labeling of the caspases J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135 2013 9130 9138 23701470
406 Zhang L. Lovell S. De Vita E. Jagtap P.K.A. Lucy D. Goya Grocin A. A KLK6 activity-based probe reveals a role for KLK6 activity in pancreatic cancer cell invasion J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144 2022 22493 22504 36413626
407 Lovell S. Zhang L. Kryza T. Neodo A. Bock N. De Vita E. A suite of activity-based probes to dissect the KLK activome in drug-resistant prostate cancer J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143 2021 8911 8924 34085829
408 Poreba M. Rut W. Vizovisek M. Groborz K. Kasperkiewicz P. Finlay D. Selective imaging of cathepsin L in breast cancer by fluorescent activity-based probes Chem. Sci. 9 2018 2113 2129 29719685
409 Poreba M. Groborz K. Vizovisek M. Maruggi M. Turk D. Turk B. Fluorescent probes towards selective cathepsin B detection and visualization in cancer cells and patient samples Chem. Sci. 10 2019 8461 8477 31803426
410 LeBeau A.M. Lee M. Murphy S.T. Hann B.C. Warren R.S. Delos Santos R. Imaging a functional tumorigenic biomarker in the transformed epithelium Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110 2013 93 98 23248318
411 Nam D.H. Rodriguez C. Remacle A.G. Strongin A.Y. Ge X. Active-site MMP-selective antibody inhibitors discovered from convex paratope synthetic libraries Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 113 2016 14970 14975 27965386
412 Razai A.S. Eckelman B.P. Salvesen G.S. Selective inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase 10 (MMP10) with a single-domain antibody J. Biol. Chem. 295 2020 2464 2472 31953328
413 Arkadash V. Yosef G. Shirian J. Cohen I. Horev Y. Grossman M. Development of high affinity and high specificity inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinase 14 through computational design and directed evolution J. Biol. Chem. 292 2017 3481 3495 28087697
414 Arkadash V. Radisky E.S. Papo N. Combinatorial engineering of N-TIMP2 variants that selectively inhibit MMP9 and MMP14 function in the cell Oncotarget 9 2018 32036 32053 30174795
415 Bonadio A. Wenig B.L. Hockla A. Radisky E.S. Shifman J.M. Designed loop extension followed by combinatorial screening confers high specificity to a broad matrix MetalloproteinaseInhibitor J. Mol. Biol. 435 2023 168095 37068580
416 Raeeszadeh-Sarmazdeh M. Coban M. Mahajan S. Hockla A. Sankaran B. Downey G.P. Engineering of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases TIMP-1 for fine discrimination between closely related stromelysins MMP-3 and MMP-10 J. Biol. Chem. 298 2022 101654 35101440
417 Lim S.A. Zhou J. Martinko A.J. Wang Y.H. Filippova E.V. Steri V. Targeting a proteolytic neoepitope on CUB domain containing protein 1 (CDCP1) for RAS-driven cancers J. Clin. Invest. 132 2022 e154604 35166238
418 Coussens L.M. Fingleton B. Matrisian L.M. Matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors and cancer: trials and tribulations Science 295 2002 2387 2392 11923519
419 Verhulst E. Garnier D. De Meester I. Bauvois B. Validating cell surface proteases as drug targets for cancer therapy: what do we know, and where do we go? Cancers 14 2022 624 35158891
420 Roma-Rodrigues C. Mendes R. Baptista P.V. Fernandes A.R. Targeting tumor microenvironment for cancer therapy Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20 2019 840 30781344
421 Becker J.W. Marcy A.I. Rokosz L.L. Axel M.G. Burbaum J.J. Fitzgerald P.M.D. Stromelysin-1: three-dimensional structure of the inhibited catalytic domain and of the C-truncated proenzyme Protein Sci. 4 1995 1966 1976 8535233
422 Salameh M.A. Soares A.S. Hockla A. Radisky E.S. Structural basis for accelerated cleavage of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI) by human mesotrypsin J. Biol. Chem. 283 2008 4115 4123 18077447
423 Walter J. Steigemann W. Singh T. Bartunik H. Bode W. Huber R. On the disordered activation domain in trypsinogen: chemical labelling and low-temperature crystallography Acta Cryst. B 38 1982 1462 1472
424 Podobnik M. Kuhelj R. Turk V. Turk D. Crystal structure of the wild-type human procathepsin B at 2.5 Å resolution reveals the native active site of a papain-like cysteine protease zymogen J. Mol. Biol. 271 1997 774 788 9299326
425 Sielecki A. Fujinaga M. Read R. James M. Refined structure of porcine pepsinogen at 1.8 Å resolution J. Mol. Biol. 219 1991 671 692 2056534
426 Patschull A.O. Segu L. Nyon M.P. Lomas D.A. Nobeli I. Barrett T.E. Therapeutic target-site variability in α1-antitrypsin characterized at high resolution Acta Crystallogr. Sect. F Struct. Biol. Cryst. Commun. 67 2011 1492 1497
427 Zhao B. Yuan C. Li R. Qu D. Huang M. Ngo J.C.K. Crystal structures of matriptase in complex with its inhibitor hepatocyte growth factor activator inhibitor-1 J. Biol. Chem. 288 2013 11155 11164 23443661
