
==== Front
Imeta
Imeta
10.1002/(ISSN)2770-596X
IMT2
iMeta
2770-5986
2770-596X
John Wiley and Sons Inc. Hoboken

10.1002/imt2.159
IMT2159
Review Article
Review Articles
Promising dawn in the management of pulmonary hypertension: The mystery veil of gut microbiota
GUT MICROBIOTA IN PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
YANG et al.
Yang Yicheng 1
Zhang Hanwen 1
Wang Yaoyao 2
Xu Jing 1 3
Shu Songren 4
Wang Peizhi 1 5
Ding Shusi 6
Huang Yuan http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1420-8932
4
Zheng Lemin 6 7 zhengl@bjmu.edu.cn

Yang Yuejin http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1309-2667
1 yangyjfw@126.com

Xiong Changming http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7468-5039
1 xiongcmfw@163.com

1 State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Department of Cardiology Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College Beijing China
2 State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Department of Nephrology Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College Beijing China
3 Department of Genetics University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen Groningen The Netherlands
4 State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Department of Cardiac Surgery Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College Beijing China
5 Center for Molecular Cardiology University of Zurich Zurich Switzerland
6 China National Clinical Research Center for Neurological Diseases, Tiantan Hospital, Advanced Innovation Center for Human Brain Protection The Capital Medical University Beijing China
7 Key Laboratory of Molecular Cardiovascular Sciences of Ministry of Education, NHC Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Molecular Biology and Regulatory Peptides, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Health Science Center The Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences and Institute of Systems Biomedicine, Peking University Beijing China
* Correspondence Changming Xiong and Yuejin Yang, State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Department of Cardiology, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100037, China.
Email: xiongcmfw@163.com and yangyjfw@126.com
Lemin Zheng, China National Clinical Research Center for Neurological Diseases, Tiantan Hospital, Advanced Innovation Center for Human Brain Protection, The Capital Medical University, Beijing 100050, China.
Email: zhengl@bjmu.edu.cn

01 1 2024
4 2024
3 2 10.1002/imt2.v3.2 e15915 11 2023
19 9 2023
25 11 2023
© 2024 The Authors. iMeta published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of iMeta Science.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Abstract

The gut microbiota is a complex community of microorganisms inhabiting the intestinal tract, which plays a vital role in human health. It is intricately involved in the metabolism, and it also affects diverse physiological processes. The gut–lung axis is a bidirectional pathway between the gastrointestinal tract and the lungs. Recent research has shown that the gut microbiome plays a crucial role in immune response regulation in the lungs and the development of lung diseases. In this review, we present the interrelated factors concerning gut microbiota and the associated metabolites in pulmonary hypertension (PH), a lethal disease characterized by elevated pulmonary vascular pressure and resistance. Our research team explored the role of gut‐microbiota‐derived metabolites in cardiovascular diseases and established the correlation between metabolites such as putrescine, succinate, trimethylamine N‐oxide (TMAO), and N, N, N‐trimethyl‐5‐aminovaleric acid with the diseases. Furthermore, we found that specific metabolites, such as TMAO and betaine, have significant clinical value in PH, suggesting their potential as biomarkers in disease management. In detailing the interplay between the gut microbiota, their metabolites, and PH, we underscored the potential therapeutic approaches modulating this microbiota. Ultimately, we endeavor to alleviate the substantial socioeconomic burden associated with this disease. This review presents a unique exploratory analysis of the link between gut microbiota and PH, intending to propel further investigations in the gut–lung axis.

With the rapid development of technologies, including metagenomic and nontargeted or targeted metabolomics, the knowledge of gut microbiota and their related metabolites is constantly growing. Dysfunctions of microorganisms are associated with cardiovascular diseases, and gut microbiota and its associated metabolites are also involved in the pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension. In addition, pulmonary hypertension might result in the alteration of bacterial flora. Here, we provide a comprehensive landscape of gut microbiota and metabolites in pulmonary hypertension, emphasizing the interplay between microorganisms and hosts in modulating pulmonary hypertension.

Highlights

The significant development in gut microbiota has brought an unprecedented paradigm for pulmonary hypertension (PH) management in recent years, which has delighted researchers and clinicians in precise disease control.

The gut–lung axis is the bidirectional interaction between the gut and lung, which occurs through circulation, the nervous system, and other physiological processes, ultimately affecting the health of both the gut and the lung.

We provided a comprehensive landscape of gut microbiota and its associated metabolites in PH, emphasizing the interplay between microorganisms and hosts in modulating PH.

With the rapid development of technologies, including metagenomic and metabolomics on gut microbiota, the association of microorganisms and the human body will be untangled eventually, which will bring the dawn for disease cure followed by prognosis improvement among patients with PH.

disease management
gut–lung axis
gut microbiota
metabolites
pulmonary hypertension
Special Discipline Development Project of Fuwai Hospital, CAMS2022‐FWTS04 China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences Initiative for Innovative Medicine2016‐I2M‐3‐009 National Natural Science Foundation of China 10.13039/501100001809 82300345 Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities 10.13039/501100012226 3332023129 High‐level hospital clinical research fees of Fuwai Hospital, CAMS2022‐GSP‐TS‐6 and 2023‐GSP‐QN‐23 China Scholarship Council202306210349 source-schema-version-number2.0
cover-dateApril 2024
details-of-publishers-convertorConverter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.4.4 mode:remove_FC converted:13.06.2024
Yang, Yicheng , Hanwen Zhang , Yaoyao Wang , Jing Xu , Songren Shu , Peizhi Wang , Shusi Ding , et al. 2024. “Promising Dawn in the Management of Pulmonary Hypertension: The Mystery Veil of Gut Microbiota.” iMeta 3 , e159. 10.1002/imt2.159

Yicheng Yang, Hanwen Zhang, Yaoyao Wang, and Jing Xu contributed equally to this study.
==== Body
pmcINTRODUCTION

Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a pathophysiological state resulting from various pathogenetic factors. As per the 2022 European Society of Cardiology/European Respiratory Society guideline, PH is defined as an average pressure of greater than 20 mmHg in mean pulmonary artery pressure on supine right heart catheterization at rest [1]. PH is a progressive disease that can lead to heart failure, ultimately leading to fatality. With the advancement in disease and medical examination technology, PH has gained increased attention as a cardiovascular disease (CVD) in the past decade. PH patients present with unspecific signs and symptoms, including fatigue, exertional dyspnea, chest pain, edema of the legs or abdomen, and dizziness. Hence, when diagnosed, most PH has deteriorated to the advanced stage and missed the optimal treatment timing, leading to short survival time and poor prognosis. Based on pathogenetic causes and relevant treatments, PH has been categorized into Groups 1−5, including pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), PH associated with left heart disease, PH associated with lung diseases and/or hypoxia, PH associated with pulmonary artery obstructions, and PH with unclear and/or multifactorial mechanisms [1, 2, 3, 4].

PAH is a condition distinguished by elevated pulmonary vascular pressure and resistance, which is caused by the proliferative, exogenic, and fibrotic remodeling of pulmonary arterioles [2, 5, 6]. While the previous perspectives attributed the abnormality of the pulmonary vessels to the overproliferated smooth muscle cells and dysfunctional endothelial cells, recent research has shifted the focus toward the modulation of interstitial cells and immuno‐inflammatory cells [7, 8, 9], as well as metabolic dysfunction (Warburg effect) in PAH [10, 11, 12]. Despite our current in‐depth understanding of PAH, clinical treatment still relies merely on targeted drugs, including phosphodiesterase‐5 inhibitors, endothelin receptor antagonists, soluble guanylate cyclase stimulators, and prostaglandins. Disappointingly, these drugs can not reverse the pathogenesis of pulmonary vascular remodeling, leading to the failure to prevent deterioration and the need for a lung transplant in severe cases [2]. For another subtype of Group 4 PH named chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH), therapeutic options such as balloon pulmonary angioplasty and pulmonary endarterectomy are regarded as clinically beneficial strategies [13, 14, 15, 16]. However, the invasive injury, complexity of operations, and time‐consuming nature hinder prompt interventions on the disease. Despite our current understanding of PH, it is still a great challenge to find effective therapies for this “cancer‐like” disease. Further exploration of treatment paradigms is essential to achieve the real “cure” of PH.

The significant development in gut microbiota has brought an unprecedented paradigm for disease management in recent years, which has delighted researchers and clinicians in precise disease control [17, 18]. The intestinal system is the largest organ in the human body. It contains a vast community of microorganisms, with bacteria, archaea, fungi, and viruses being the predominant members constituting the unique gene pool in each human body. Animal species, including humans, co‐evolve with microbial communities [18, 19, 20]. Microorganisms constantly adapt to their hosts' environments and ecologies in the process of nutrient absorption [19], colonization resistance [21], and immunity [22]. Gut microbiota composition and its related nucleic acid and metabolites interact with human functions in a fine‐tuned bidirectional relationship to influence individual health [23, 24] With the development in high‐throughput sequencing and metagenomics, we can obtain information on dynamic changes in human gut microbiota, thus helping to unveil the mystery of gut microorganisms. In the past decade, gut microbiota in humans has captured the sustained interest of researchers, and its involvement in the pathogenesis of CVDs has been elucidated. For example, increased abundance of Enterobacteriaceae and Streptococcus spp. resulted in the phenotype of atherosclerotic CVD [25]. Compared with the healthy populations, decreased microbial richness and diversity accompanied by the excessive growth of bacteria such as Prevotella and Klebsiella were discovered in hypertension patients [26]. In addition, patients with heart failure exhibited decreased microbial richness, including depletion of taxa in the Lachnospiraceae family [27]. Although not as thoroughly studied as gut microbiota in other CVDs, quite a little progress has been made in microorganisms in PH. In particular, the landscape of altered gut microbiome in PAH patients has been portrayed as characterizing increased trimethylamine (TMA)/trimethylamine N‐oxide (TMAO)‐producing bacteria and decreased butyrate‐ and propionate‐producing bacteria, including Coprococcus, Butyrivibrio, Eubacterium, Akkermansia, Bacteroides, and Lachnospiraceae [28].

However, limited by the significant heterogeneity among individuals, uncovering the actual variation of gut microbiota and their accurate role in disease pathogenesis is a considerable challenge. The products derived from gut microbiota, particularly its related metabolites, seem to be another window for catching sight of the accurate interaction between microorganisms and diseases. Mounting evidence has clarified the association between CVDs and metabolites, including TMA‐related products, short‐chain fatty acids (SCFAs), bile acids, and amino acids [29, 30, 31, 32]. Our research team has investigated the involvement of gut‐microbiota‐derived metabolites in CVDs and has demonstrated the association between putrescine [33], succinate [34], TMAO [35, 36, 37], and N, N, N‐trimethyl‐5‐aminovaleric acid (TMAVA) [38, 39] with CVDs. Moreover, we found that metabolites, such as TMAO and betaine, were potential biomarkers in the area of PH, showing significant clinical value [40, 41].

With the rapid development of technologies, including metagenomic and nontargeted or targeted metabolomics on gut microbiota, the intricate relationship between microorganisms and the human body will be deciphered over time, which will bring the dawn for disease cure followed by prognosis improvement among patients with PH (Figure 1). To date, more studies have focused on the microbiota and its related products in PH, devoted to changing the present defective management paradigms. This review comprehensively presents the landscape of gut microbiota and its associated metabolites in PH, emphasizing the interplay between microorganisms and hosts in modulating PH. We believe our work can promote the development of PH, ultimately contributing to reducing the disease burden.

Figure 1 Presentations of the association between gut microbiota and pulmonary hypertension. With the rapid development of technologies, including metagenomic and nontargeted or targeted metabolomics, the knowledge of gut microbiota and their related metabolites is constantly growing. Dysfunctions of microorganisms are associated with cardiovascular diseases, including heart failure, hypertension, and atherosclerotic heart disease. Recently, it has been demonstrated that gut microbiota and its associated metabolites are also involved in the pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension. In addition, pulmonary hypertension might result in the alteration of bacterial flora. Here, we provide a comprehensive landscape of gut microbiota and metabolites in pulmonary hypertension, emphasizing the interplay between microorganisms and hosts in modulating pulmonary hypertension. CVD, cardiovascular disease; SCFA, short‐chain fatty acid; TMAO, trimethylamine N‐oxide.

GUT–LUNG AXIS

The gut–lung axis delineates the bidirectional communication between the gut and lung, shaped by environmental factors, gut microbiota, and metabolites. This interaction occurs through circulation, the nervous system, and other physiological processes, ultimately affecting the health of both the gut and the lungs [42]. The gut–lung axis concept was initially introduced by Turner–Warwick in 1968 [43], which led to subsequent investigations into the correlation between lung and gut diseases. In 1976, Kraft et al. observed a higher incidence of chronic bronchopulmonary disease among individuals with severe inflammatory bowel disease [44]. CT scans unveiled an association between the severity of gut and lung symptoms [44], suggesting that gut damage and translocation of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) into the circulation could lead to lung injury. This link between the gut–lung axis and spontaneous bone marrow transplant complications has also been established [45]. Additionally, lung diseases have demonstrated an impact on the gut microbiota and increase the risk of intestine dysfunction, as asthma patients had twice the incidence of irritable bowel syndrome as healthy individuals [46]. While the gut–lung axis has been confirmed in human and mouse models, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Continued discourse on this subject will enhance our comprehension of the interplay between gut microbiota and PH.

Homology between lungs and intestines

The homology between lungs and intestines is the structural basis for the “gut–lung axis.” The lung, trachea, respiratory epithelium, and intestines have homology in embryonic development, all originating from the endoderm [47]. A recent study showed that changing the activity of transcription factors induced intestinal progenitor cells from embryonic lung progenitor cells, which can further produce various types of intestinal cells [48]. The respiratory and digestive mucosa belong to the mucosal immune system, both having a typical carrier system and can produce large amounts of secretory immunoglobulin A (sIgA). sIgA is a common molecular basis for mucosal immunity in various sites and a vital substance that reflects the “lung–gut axis” [49]. Many laboratories have already proven that sIgA can prevent pathogenic bacteria from spreading within the host tissue and can bind to many nonpathogenic or beneficial bacteria [50]. These discoveries imply a noteworthy involvement of this particular antibody in regulating the composition of microbial communities. In addition, researchers found that the lung functional protein pulmonary surfactant protein A can be detected in the intestinal tissue of patients with intestinal inflammation [51]. The chemokine eotaxin, which initially recruits eosinophils to the site of the lesion, and its mRNA can be expressed in both the lungs and intestines [52, 53]. The many similarities in structure and immune regulatory mechanisms between the intestinal and lung mucosa form the biological basis for bidirectional communication within the gut–lung axis.

The immune response

The mucosal immune system involves the lungs and the intestine, and inflammation in one organ may reflect in the other. Micro‐fold cells in mucosa‐associated lymphoid tissue recognize antigens and present them to dendritic cells. These dendritic cells then migrate to lymph nodes and stimulate immune responses from T and B lymphocytes when pathogens are present [54]. The lungs and intestines share structural and functional similarities, allowing for the presence of common homing receptors, such as CC‐chemokine receptor (CCR) 6, α4β7, and CCR9. These receptors recruit T cells to the intestine, while CCR4 directs T cells to the lungs [55]. The interaction of adhesion molecules, specifically VCAM‐1 and α4β1 integrin, along with L‐selectin and PNAd, is essential for facilitating immune cell homing to the lungs. During intestinal inflammation, T effector memory cells are generated and express L‐selectin/CD62L. When these cells enter the circulation, they bind to the PNAd ligand on the lung endothelium [56]. Lymphocytes rely on these receptors to move between organs in the periphery. An in vitro study demonstrated the ability of lung dendritic cells to induce the expression of CCR9 and α4β7 on T cells, providing evidence for an entero‐pulmonary axis. When a mucosal lesion occurs, it generates an immune response that may affect other mucosal immune responses through the mucosal immune pathway. This can lead to varying degrees of immune response in local stimulation at different mucosal sites. For instance, intestinal microorganisms have the capacity to stimulate the generation of type 2 and type 3 intrinsic lymphocytes, which migrate through lymph and blood circulation to the respiratory tract, potentially causing damage [55].

Metabolites of gut microbiota

The gut–lung axis involves various factors that contribute to its functional roles, and one of the indispensable mediators is the gut metabolites. Metabolites generated by gut microbiota circulate in the bloodstream, facilitating bidirectional communication between the lungs and the gut and exerting distinct effects on each organ.

One well‐known illustration of these metabolites is SCFAs, such as butyrate, propionate, and acetate. A decrease in SCFA‐producing bacteria levels in the gut leads to reduced circulating levels of SCFAs [57]. Probiotic dietary fiber, which regulates gut microbiota, is not degraded by the digestive enzymes but is converted to SCFAs by gut microbiota [58]. Butyrate, as a representative SCFA, plays an essential role in gut epithelial cell function and promotes differentiation and maturation of immune cells, thereby regulating the gut immune system [59]. SCFAs also play a vital role in mucosal immunity, enhancing the metabolism of plasma B‐cells and increasing the permeability of tight junctions to promote differentiation of goblet cells and mucin production. This leads to enhanced production of intestinal IgA to strengthen the intestinal epithelial barrier function [60]. Furthermore, these SCFAs have anti‐inflammatory properties. They induce Treg activation via G protein‐coupled receptors or through epigenetic modifications by inhibiting histone deacetylases (HDACs) [61, 62]. The microbial synthesis of SCFAs facilitates the generation of T‐regulatory cells in the colon [63]. Interestingly, mice fed a high‐fiber‐fed exhibit higher circulating levels of SCFAs and show a preventive effect against allergic inflammation in the lungs. In contrast, mice fed a low‐fiber‐fed exhibit lower circulating levels of SCFAs and heightened susceptibility to allergic lung disease [64]. Notably, SCFAs not only regulate the gastrointestinal immune system but also influence the bacterial profile of the gastrointestinal tract. Butyrate induces peroxisome proliferator‐activated receptor‐γ, promoting a shift in colonic epithelium toward β‐oxidation and the preservation of an anaerobic environment favored by the obligate anaerobes in the colon [65]. Conversely, the absence of butyrate leads to elevated inducible nitric oxide synthase expression and Proteobacteria expansion. Proteobacteria, facultative anaerobes proficient in nitrate respiration, are typically more abundant in dysbiotic states [65]. Butyrate regulates lung disease pathogenesis by influencing the bacterial profile in the gastrointestinal tract. In summary, some SCFAs are utilized as an energy source by gut cells, while other SCFAs, such as butyrate, can cross the membrane, entering the peripheral blood system and influencing the differentiation and maturation of immune cells in the bone marrow cavity. Immune cells regulated by butyrate enter the lungs through blood circulation, regulating immune responses in the lungs [66].

TMAO is a byproduct of intestinal flora metabolism recognized as a potential risk factor for CVDs and other chronic illnesses, including lung diseases. Elevated concentrations of TMAO were demonstrated to be predictive of CVDs risk nearly a decade ago [67]. Recently, its association with pulmonary diseases has also been gradually revealed. TMAO mainly stems from choline, abundant in red meat and fish. Intestinal flora choline‐TMA lyase can break it down to produce TMA, which enters the liver via the portal vein and undergoes oxidation by flavin‐containing monooxygenases to generate TMAO ultimately [67, 68]. After synthesis in the liver, TMAO is transported through the bloodstream to various systems in the body, including the lungs and heart [69]. TMAO stimulates inflammation and causes structural damage to the pulmonary blood vessels. Studies have demonstrated that heightened blood concentrations of TMAO can impair endothelial function and trigger vascular inflammation due to increased oxidative stress [70, 71]. TMAO activates the TXNIP‐NLRP3 inflammasome, leading to endothelial nitric oxide synthase activity inhibition and reduced nitric oxide production. This process induces oxidative stress and elevates the levels of interleukin‐1β and interleukin‐18 [72]. TMAO enhances the transforming growth factor‐beta (TGF‐β)/Smad content in right ventricular fibroblasts when exposed to hypoxia. This growth factor engages its receptor and activates fibroblasts through the second messenger Smad, which stimulates the release of type I collagen and contributes to cardiac and pulmonary fibrosis. The increased expression of molecules related to the TGF‐β/p38 mitogen‐activated protein kinase (MAPK)/Smad pathway suggests their involvement in the onset of pulmonary and right ventricular fibrosis [73, 74].

In addition, the regulation roles of other gut microbiota‐related metabolites in the lung, including deaminated tryptophan [75]. are being discovered, which contributes to further knowledge of the gut–lung axis.

Microbial components in the gut

Microbial components are another soluble substance that facilitates cross‐talk between the lungs and the gut via the circulatory system. Microbial components include microbial‐associated molecular patterns, which interact with host pattern recognition receptors, like toll‐like receptors (TLRs) or nod‐like receptors [76], to generate immune inflammatory effects in the human body. Microbial‐associated molecular patterns include peptidoglycans and LPSs, with LPS being a crucial constituent of the outer membrane of most gram‐negative bacteria, playing a critical role in protecting bacteria from environmental stress, antibiotic resistance, and symbiosis [77]. LPS is essential for human health and triggers a different mechanism of activating immunity compared to other immune agents, the only substance that activates pulmonary phagocytes through TLR4 [78]. After TLR4 activation, there are conformational changes within the cells, signal transmission within the cells, and activation of nuclear factor kappa‐B (NF‐κB) and MAPK pathways [79, 80]. These two pathways eventually release inflammatory responses, such as interleukin‐1, interleukin‐6, TNF‐α, and nitric oxide [81]. ultimately resulting in acute lung injury [82]. Research has shown that mice with cleared gut microbiota by antibiotics are more vulnerable to the influenza virus. The TLR7 signaling pathway is hindered, leading to a downregulated immune response and an impaired immune activity of certain T lymphocyte subpopulations, making it difficult for the influenza virus to be cleared [83, 84]. Excessive reactive oxygen species production is a significant factor in LPS‐induced acute lung injury [85]. The attack of reactive oxygen species on mitochondrial DNA in lung cells leads to cell death and tissue damage. Injury to alveolar epithelial cells and endothelial cells in the capillaries results in diffuse interstitial lung edema and acute hypoxemic respiratory failure [86].

Dysbiosis of gut microbiota

Dysbiosis of gut microbiota is a visible manifestation of an imbalanced lung–gut axis, closely linked with developing respiratory diseases. The human intestine serves as a vast microbial habitat, with thousands of bacteria residing in the adult intestine, totaling up to 1014, nearly 10 times the count of adult cells and 100 times the count of genes encoded within the human body [87, 88]. Four bacterial phyla (Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Actinobacteria) predominate in the human colon [89]. Alterations in the gut microbiota's composition and functions can influence the respiratory system via a shared mucosal immune system. Mucin secretion from the gut epithelium cells limits bacterial migration into epithelial tissue. Once the mucosal epithelium is damaged, microbial translocation occurs, leading to systemic inflammation followed by severe diseases such as sepsis [90]. Moreover, mucin and its components can shape microbiota residing in composition in the lumen of the mucosal tissue. This is achieved by some bacteria adhering, surviving, feeding on mucin, or altering the mucin layer [89].

It is crucial to emphasize the bidirectional nature of the gut–lung axis, as respiratory diseases frequently exhibit an imbalance in an imbalanced equilibrium between microbial immigration and elimination in the gut. For instance, patients with COVID‐19 exhibit dynamic changes in their gut microbiota throughout hospitalization, marked by a decline in SCFA‐producing bacteria (such as Faecalibacterium) and an elevation in facultatively anaerobic bacteria (such as Escherichia–Shigella) [91]. A consistent rise in Eggerthella belonging to the class Coriobacteriia was also noted, potentially contributing to increased intestinal permeability and subsequent gastrointestinal symptoms [92]. Given that a leaky gut induces translocation of intestinal bacteria, this could initiate systemic inflammation, culminating in the progression of severe disease. Aside from COVID‐19, specific bacteria are often detected in pathological fecal matter, such as Bacteroides, Faecalibacterium, Agathobacter, Blautia A, and Roseburia (in the case of asthma) or Faecalicatena, Oscillibacter, Lawsonibacter, Flavonifractor, and Streptomyces (in the case of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [COPD]) [93]. A reduced α‐diversity of intestine flora could be detected in mycobacterium tuberculosis patients compared to controls, with a relatively increased abundance of Proteobacteria and a decreased abundance of Bacteroides [94, 95, 96]. Chronic inflammation‐induced changes in physicochemical properties can promote the establishment of specific species within the microbial community, transitioning them from transient to resident members. Many respiratory disorders have manifestations in the gastrointestinal tract and impact the composition of intestine flora. Influenza virus pneumonia induces diarrhea via an increase in the expression of lipid carrier protein‐2 and colonic mucin Muc5ac, indicating the occurrence of mild intestinal inflammation [97, 98]. Bacterial pneumonia caused by multidrug‐resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa can induce gastrointestinal disorders, possibly by inhibiting the proliferation of gastrointestinal epithelial cells by restricting the cell cycle of the M phase [99]. CD4+T cells have a positive correlation with intestine flora to maintain the ecological balance [94]. Although some researchers have proposed that lung disease may have an impact on intestinal microbiota, the precise molecular mechanisms underlying the influence of the lungs on the intestinal flora remain poorly understood. Oxygen homeostasis is essential for the maintenance of gut flora function. The fetal lungs develop under low oxygen conditions, and premature birth can expose the developing lungs to a hyperoxia environment. A hyperoxia environment can directly inhibit the expression of antimicrobial peptides in intestinal epithelial cells and can also affect the composition of the ileal microbiota, particularly leading to an increase in Staphylococcus abundance. Antimicrobial peptides play a critical role in regulating the stability of the host gut microbiota. The damage to ileal epithelial cells resulting from hyperoxia exposure is associated with the downregulation of antimicrobial peptide expression [100]. On the contrary, hypoxia caused by COPD results in gastrointestinal integrity damage, and low active glucose transport and reduced protein digestion and absorption cause the disturbance in the intestinal flora along with the decrease in the synthesis of SCFAs and the concentration of acetic acid in serum, which reversely aggravates the severity of the disease [101]. Immunity is another one of the potential factors. Type 2 ILC (ILC2) in mice promotes intestinal mucosa antiparasite defense and tissue repair. These cells can be transferred from the lungs to the intestine and mature via the pulmonary‐intestinal axis during IL‐33 stimulation and postnatal developmental stages. Hyperactivation of allergen‐induced lung ILC2 can cause inflammation of gut ILC2, while the developmental defect of lung ILC2 can significantly affect the number and function of intestine ILC2 [102, 103]. Another potential pathogenesis involving the gut–lung axis is long noncoding RNA. Research demonstrates that miR‐155 and miR‐21 are significantly upregulated both in pulmonary and intestinal mucosal injury tissue. MiR‐155 targets SOCS1 in the lung and FOXO3a in the gut to play a role in proinflammation [104, 105], while miR‐21 promotes fibrosis via 5MAD7 in the lung and reduces intestinal barrier function via RhoB [106, 107, 108]. Although epigenetics does not reveal which is the cause and which is the effect of the gut and the lung, it suggests a new direction to explore the relationship between them. Recently, changes in respiratory microbial composition have been linked to the development of PH. Exposure to Streptococcus salivarius resulted in increased right ventricular systolic pressure, right ventricular hypertrophy, and pulmonary vascular remodeling, all typical characteristics of PH. S. salivarius‐induced PH was characterized by increased inflammation in the lung and was also associated with a shift in the gut microbiome composition, indicating potential communication between the lung and gut axis [109]. Overall, the specific impact of changes in lung microbiota on gut function is still poorly characterized and needs further research efforts.

In brief, the homology between the lungs and intestines is the structural basis for the gut–lung axis. Immune cells and their interactions exert an essential role in the physiological process. Gut metabolites and microbial components, including LPS, serve as indispensable mediators in the gut–lung axis. In addition, changes in the composition and functions of the gut microbiota can influence the respiratory system via a shared mucosal immune system, while lung diseases also cause dysfunction in the intestinal tract. The knowledge of the gut–lung axis is briefly shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2 Bidirectional gut–lung axis. The gut–lung axis is the interaction between the gut and lung, which is influenced by environmental factors, gut microbiota, and metabolites. This interaction occurs through circulation, the nervous system, and other physiological processes, ultimately affecting the health of both the gut and the lungs. (1) The homology between the lungs and intestines is the structural basis for the gut‐lung axis. (2) Micro‐fold cells in muco‐associated lymphoid tissue recognize antigens and present them to dendritic cells, which migrate to lymph nodes and stimulate immune responses from T and B lymphocytes when pathogens are present. (3) Metabolites produced by gut microbiota, including TMAO and SCFAs, circulate through the blood system to facilitate bidirectional communication between the lungs and the gut, exerting distinct effects on each organ. (4) Microbial components such as lipopolysaccharides are another soluble substance that facilitate communication between the lungs and the gut via the circulatory system. (5) Dysbiosis of gut microbiota is a visible manifestation of an imbalanced lung–gut axis, and changes in the composition and functions of the gut microbiota can influence the respiratory system via a shared mucosal immune system. LPS, lipopolysaccharide; SCFA, short‐chain fatty acid; TMAO, trimethylamine N‐oxide.

GUT MICROBIOTA PROFILES OF PH

The gastrointestinal tract contains hundreds of microbial communities, which closely engage with their hosts and provide genetic, metabolic, and immunological benefits. Alterations and dysbiosis in the gut microbiota have been noted in diverse diseases, including CVDs, colon cancer, obesity, and rheumatoid arthritis. Based on the theoretical knowledge of the gut–lung axis, the association between gut microbiota and PH has been reasonably hypothesized, and extraordinary outcomes have been achieved in recent years. Alterations in gut microbiota have been observed in PH patients and animal models of PH induced by hypoxia or monocrotaline (MCT). Here, we summarize the knowledge of gut microbiota profiles in PH to lay the groundwork for a deeper comprehension of the “gut‐PH” axis (Table 1).

Table 1 Microbes detected in pulmonary hypertension.

References	Sample (sample size)	Differential taxa feature in PH	
Kim et al. [28]	PAH patients (18)

Healthy subjects (13)

	↑: Coprococcus, Butyrivibrio, Lachnospira, Eubacterium, Akkermansia, Bacteroides, Enterococcal, Bifidobacterium

↓: Lactococcal

	
Jose et al. [110]	PAH patients (20)

Healthy subjects (20)

	↑: Anaerostipes rhamnosivorans

↓: Amedibacterium intestinale, Ruminococcus bicirculans, Ruminococcus albus, Lachnospiraceae bacterium GAM79

	
Ikubo et al. [111]	CTEPH patients (11)

Healthy subjects (22)

	↓: Faecalibacterium, Roseburia, Fusicatenibacter, α‐diversity	
Moutsoglou et al. [112]	PAH patients (72)

Healthy subjects (39)

Family subjects (15)

	✓ PAH patients vs. healthy subjects:

↑: Bacteroides, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, Parabacteroides distasonis, and Bacteroides vulgatus

↓: Shannon diversity, Lachnospiraceae, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Eubacterium rectale, R. bicirculans, Roseburia sp., and Bifidobacterium adolescentis

✓ PAH patients vs. family subjects:

↓: Shannon diversity, E. rectale, Butyrivibrio sp., B. angulatum, Lachnospira pectinoschiza, and R. torques

	
Callejo et al. [113]	HySu rats (4)

Control rats (4)

	↑: Peptostreptococcaceae

↓: Bacteroidetes (Butyricimonas, Odoribacter, Porphyromonas), Cyanobacteria‐related bacteri, Acidobacteria, Butyricimonas, Odoribacter Porphyromonas

	
Sanada et al. [114]	HySu rats (4)

Control rats (6)

	↑: Rothia, Prevotellaceae, Parabacteroides, Parasutterella, Allobaculum, Parvibacter, Faecalibaculum, Ruminococcaceae, Bifidobacterium, Lachnospiraceae, Eubacterium coprostanoligenes group, Coprococcus 3, Acetitomaculum

↓: Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, Cyanobacteria, Bacteroides, Akkermansia, Dehalobacterium, Marvinbryantia, Enterococcus, Bacteroidetes S24‐7 group uncultured bacterium

	
Sharma et al. [115]	Hypoxia mice (8)

Control mice (7)

	↑: Chao 1 richness, Shannon diversity, evenness, Prevotella, Oscillospira, Ruminococcus

↓: F/B ratio, Lactobacillus

	
Sharma et al. [116]	MCT rats (6)

Control rats (5)

	↑: F/B ratio, Corynebacteriaceae, Erysipelotrichaceae

↓: Enterobacteriaceae

	
Hong et al. [117]	MCT rats (6)

Control rats (6)

	↑: Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria

↓: Bacteroidota, Spirochaetota

	
Luo et al. [118]	Hypoxia rats (5)

MCT rats (5)

HySu rats (5)

Control rats (5)

	✓ Hypoxia group:

↑: Richness, Firmicutes

↓: α‐diversity, Actinobacteria, unidentified bacteria, Verrucomicrobia

✓ MCT group:

↑: Richness, Firmicutes, Actinobacteria

↓: Bacteroidetes, unidentified bacteria, Verrucomicrobia

✓ HySu group:

↑: Richness, Firmicutes

↓: Bacteroidetes, unidentified bacteria

	
Nijiati et al. [119]	High‐altitude PH rats (10)Control rats (10)	↑: F/B ratio, Prevotellaceae, Desulfovibrionaceae

↓: Lactobacillaceae, Lachnospiraceae

	
Chen et al. [120]	Left pulmonary artery ligation‐induced rats (11)

Sham operation rats (11)

	↑: Sporobacte

↓: Desulfovibrio, Eubacterium

	
Abbreviations: CTEPH, chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension; F/B ratio, Firmicutes‐to‐Bacteroidetes ratio; HySu, Hypoxia/Sugen 5416; MCT, monocrotaline; PAH, pulmonary arterial hypertension; PH, pulmonary hypertension.

John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PH patients

PAH patients

A recent study demonstrated adult PAH patients had distinct gut microbiota profiles [28]. Compared to controls, PAH patients exhibited significantly decreased α‐diversity, bacterial richness, and evenness. Actinobacteria phylum, specifically the Bifidobacterium, was enriched in these patients, while propionate‐producing bacteria, including Akkermansia and Bacteroides, and butyrate‐producing bacteria, including Butyrivibrio, Lachnospiraceae, Coprococcus, and Eubacterium were decreased. Furthermore, functional alterations in the gut microbiomes were observed, including increased production of arginine, proline, and ornithine and increased groups of bacterial communities associated with TMA/TMAO and purine metabolism in PAH. Individuals with PAH also showed a higher prevalence of various species known for their pro‐inflammatory properties, such as Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, Parabacteroides distasonis, and Bacteroides vulgatus, compared to healthy controls. Conversely, certain species with anti‐inflammatory attributes, such as Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Eubacterium rectale, Ruminococcus bicirculans, Roseburia sp., and Bifidobacterium adolescentis), were observed to be lower in patients than in controls [112]. In a study by Jose et al., [110] which enrolled a higher proportion of idiopathic PAH patients, a decrease of Amedibacterium intestinale, R. bicirculans, Ruminococcus albus, and Lachnospiraceae bacterium GAM79 was observed in patients compared with the healthy individuals.

Other subtype patients

A study [111] focused on the gut microbiota profiles in CTEPH, another subtype of PH. The feces from 11 CTEPH patients and 22 healthy controls were used to explore the differences in gut microbiota by metagenomic shotgun sequencing. α‐Diversity was significantly decreased in patients with CTEPH compared to controls. Notably, the relative abundance of bacteria, including Faecalibacterium, Roseburia, and Fusicatenibacter, which possess a range of biological functions such as anti‐inflammatory properties to maintain gut homeostasis, decreased and negatively correlated with endotoxin levels in patients. In addition, a recent study [121]. explored the gut microbiome with PH in lowlanders and highlanders. Compared to controls, TMA‐producing species were increased, and α‐diversity of gut microbiota showed the opposite trend among PH patients living in the lowland. However, no difference in these gut microorganisms was identified among highlanders with PH. This work provided gut microbial target distinctions among PH patients in lowland and highland, and further investigation is needed to explore the potential microbiota‐dependent pathogenesis.

Animal models

Gut microbiota dysbiosis, characterized by an imbalanced ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes (F/B), has been demonstrated in various animal models of PH, including MCT‐induced, Sugen 5416‐hypoxia (SuHx)‐induced, hypoxia‐induced, high‐altitude‐induced, and left pulmonary artery ligation‐induced models.

MCT‐induced PAH rats are commonly used in translational studies, and the changes in gut microbiota in this model have also been elucidated. Compared to healthy controls, MCT‐induced rats exhibited an increased F/B ratio, and several pathogenic species, including Clostridium, Turicibacter, and Mollicutes genera, were predominant [116]. Actinobacteria, Firmicutes, Proteobacteria abundance increased, and Spirochaetota, Bacteroidetes, unidentified bacteria, and Verrucomicrobi decreased [117, 118].

A taxonomy‐based analysis of SuHx rats revealed a threefold increase in the F/B ratio compared to controls. However, the altered ratio was primarily driven by a decrease in less abundant Bacteroidetes families, with no statistically significant alterations in the presence of Firmicutes families [113, 122]. In the genus level, compared with the control rats, the abundances of Dehalobacterium, Marvinbryantia, Enterococcus, Akkermansia, Bacteroides, and Bacteroidetes S24‐7 group uncultured bacterium were lower in SuHx rats, while 14 bacteria were significantly more abundant including Acetitomaculum, Bifidobacterium, Faecalibaculum, Parvibacter, Allobaculum, Parasutterella, Parabacteroides, and Rothia [114].

Similarly, an increased F/B ratio disrupted gut microbiota homeostasis in hyp‐induced PH mice. The study observed an enhancement in the abundance of harmful microorganisms, including Marinifilaceae, Lactobacillaceae, and Helicobacteraceae, while the beneficial Bacteroidaceae, Tannerellaceae, Prevotellaceae, and Lachnospiraceae were significantly decreased [123].

High‐altitude pulmonary hypertension (HAPH) is a disease that specifically affects populations living in high‐altitude areas. The pathogenesis of this disease involves the vasoconstriction and remodeling of pulmonary blood vessels, ultimately leading to high‐altitude heart disease. A study showed that there were alterations in the gut microbiota in a rat model of HAPH. The F/B ratio and abundance of Lactobacillaceae and Planococcaceae increased, and the abundance of Prevotellaceae and Desulfovibrionaceae at the family level decreased [119]. Furthermore, in the left pulmonary artery ligation‐induced PH rat model, researchers found that the richness of Sporobacteria increased while the abundance of Eubacteriaceae, Deltaproteobacteria, and Desulfovibrio conversely decreased, indicating a novel perspective on stress‐associated experimental PH [120].

These pieces of evidence suggest the possible causative roles of microbiota changes in the early pathogenesis of PAH, while further investigations of their effects are warranted. The distinct gut microbiota profiles associated with PH are briefly demonstrated in Figure 3.

Figure 3 Distinct gut microbiota profiles of PH. PH is defined as an average pressure of greater than 20 mmHg in mean pulmonary artery pressure on supine right heart catheterization at rest. Compared to controls, PAH patients exhibited significantly decreased α‐diversity, bacterial richness, and evenness. Actinobacteria and microorganisms with pro‐inflammatory properties are increased while propionate‐ and butyrate‐producing bacteria are shown the opposite situation. α‐Diversity and the bacteria with anti‐inflammatory properties are significantly reduced in patients with CTEPH. Compared to controls, TMA‐producing species were increased, and α‐diversity of gut microbiota showed the opposite trend among PH patients living in the lowland, while no difference in these gut microorganisms was identified among highlanders with PH. Gut microbiota dysbiosis, characterized by an imbalanced ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes (F/B), has been demonstrated in various animal models of PH. The changes in gut microbiota may be involved in the pathogenesis of PH. CTEPH, chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension; HAPH, high‐altitude pulmonary hypertension; LPAL, left pulmonary artery ligation; MCT, monocrotaline; PAH, pulmonary arterial hypertension; PH, pulmonary hypertension; SuHx, sugen 5416‐hypoxia; TMA, trimethylamine.

GUT MICROBIOTA‐DEPENDENT METABOLITES IN PH

Regarding the alterations in the composition and function of the gut microbiota in PH, gut microbiota‐dependent metabolites have been a pivotal regulator ascribing to their local and systemic effects on host physiology or disease pathogenesis. Here, we summarized the knowledge of metabolites in PH based on the published studies, which provided an innovative paradigm for disease management and disease control.

TMAO‐associated metabolites

To date, TMAO‐associated metabolites are the most explored gut microbiota‐associated molecules in the field of PH, mainly elucidated by our research group. TMAO has been fully investigated for its role in CVDs. TMAO has been proven to induce myocardial hypertrophy and fibrosis, promote endothelial cell and vascular inflammatory responses, induce cardiac mitochondrial dysfunction, and facilitate platelet reactivity and thrombus formation, directly impacting the blood vessels and heart and exacerbating the progression of cardiac disease [70, 124, 125, 126]. Our team has previously studied the association between TMAO with vascular damage and cardio‐cerebrovascular diseases, including vascular aging [36], chronic heart failure [127], cognitive impairment [35], stroke [37], amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [128], and type 2 diabetes [129].

Most importantly, for the first time, we have explored the effects of TMAO in PH patients, highlighting its potential biomarker role in disease management [40]. We selected the confirmed Group 1 PAH patients by right heart catheterization and comprehensive clinical examination. After reducing the bias through rigorous inclusion and exclusion criteria and statistical model construction, we analyzed the relation between circulating TMAO levels with PAH patients' disease conditions and prognosis. Our results showed that high TMAO levels were associated with severe disease conditions and poor prognosis manifested as an increased risk of heart failure and deterioration of PAH. In addition, our later study [130] further confirmed the potential biomarker role of plasma TMAO level in different PH subtypes, including idiopathic/heritable PAH and PAH associated with congenital heart disease, except for in CTEPH. It is speculated that TMAO may be related to the pathogenesis of PH, which has been verified in basic research. In an animal study, a TMAO inhibitor named 3,3‐dimethyl‐1‐butanol (DMB) enabled to ameliorate PH induced by MCT, accompanied by a decrease in abnormal apoptosis, excessive cell proliferation, and TGF‐β expression, and restoration of endothelial nitric oxide synthase [40]. Huang et al. [131] revealed that TMAO promoted the proliferation and migration of pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells by upregulating the production of inflammatory factors in macrophages such as Kng1, Cxcl1, Cxcl2, Cxcl6, and interleukin 6, ultimately leading to pulmonary vascular remodeling. DMB could suppress the chemokines and cytokines produced by macrophages to alleviate the progression of PH. However, a study by Videja et al. [132] drew an opposite conclusion, stating the protective effect of TMAO on mitochondrial energy metabolism in an MCT‐induced rat model. It reminds us that our knowledge of TMAO in the pathogenesis of PH is still insufficient, which underscores the need for enhanced collaborative research efforts to fully depict the whole molecular landscape to reconcile the conflicting evidence surrounding this issue. Our research group is devoted to providing more solid evidence to uncover the mysterious veil of TMAO in PH.

Moreover, the values of other TMAO‐associated metabolites, including L‐carnitine, choline, trimethyllysine, and betaine in PH management, are also worth exploring. Our research has revealed that high betaine levels are associated with poor prognosis of patients with PH. However, further investigation is required to uncover the specific mechanisms underlying this association [41]. Choline, which serves as a precursor of TMAO, is involved in various physiological processes. Previous studies have demonstrated its potential biomarker role in CVDs, including acute coronary syndrome [133, 134] and hypertension [135]. Our team is the first to investigate the association between circulating choline levels and PH patients' prognosis, and we found similar biomarker effects of the metabolite in PH field [136]. Additionally, our team has discovered and defined TMAVA as another TMAO‐associated metabolite [39]. We have found that elevated TMAVA is associated with an increased risk of cardiac mortality and transplantation in heart failure. It accelerated the progression of cardiac hypertrophy by inhibiting carnitine synthesis and subsequent fatty acid oxidation [38]. Currently, we are exploring the role and value of TMAVA in the field of PH, aiming to identify novel pathogenesis targets for disease cure.

SCFAs

The gut microbiota can modulate the host immune system by releasing immunomodulatory bacterial metabolites, among which the most studied products are SCFAs, the predominant end‐products during the fermentation of nondigestible carbohydrates. The generation of SCFAs results from complicated interactions between diet and gut microbiota in the intestinal environment. SCFAs have been defined as natural ligands for free fatty acid receptors 2 and 3, expressed in various cell types, including enteroendocrine and immune cells, indicating the essential signaling roles between the host and gut microbiota [59, 137].

The associations between SCFAs and CVDs have been explored in the last decade. SCFAs, as key bacterial metabolites in host physiology, exert multiple effects on CVDs [59, 138]. Most SCFAs play positive roles in CVD pathogenesis, including atrial fibrillation [139], hypertension [23, 140], and atherosclerosis [141, 142] through mediating protection against inflammation, oxidative and mitochondrial stress, and over‐proliferation. SCFA‐producing bacteria are capable of maintaining gut microbial homeostasis. Butyrate activates peroxisome proliferator‐activated receptor‐γ, promoting the colonic epithelium toward β‐oxidation and the preservation of an anaerobic environment, fostering the prevalence of obligate anaerobes in the colon. Conversely, the lack of butyrate prompts increased expression of the inducible nitric oxide synthase and expansion of Proteobacteria, which are facultative anaerobes capable of nitrate respiration and are typically more abundant in disordered states [65].

Notably, the potential benefits of SCFAs for PH are highly encouraging, suggesting that SCFAs hold great promise for disease management and treatment. Most recently, Moutsoglou et al. have provided substantial evidence supporting the presence of gut dysbiosis in individuals with PAH and proposed a potential mechanism for the development of pulmonary vascular disease. Their study revealed a distinctive gut microbial signature in PAH patients, characterized by decreased levels of anti‐inflammatory SCFAs in the plasma [112]. In animal studies, intervention with butyrate attenuated hypoxia‐induced PH in rats, resulting in reduced right heart hypertrophy, decreased right ventricular systolic pressure, and improved pulmonary vascular remodeling. Moreover, the butyrate exerted anti‐inflammatory effects, leading to decreased accumulation of alveolar and interstitial lung macrophages [143]. Butyrate was found to induce differentiation of T‐regulatory cells through activating G protein‐coupled receptors and/or promoting epigenetic modifications and suppressing the NF‐κB pathway in macrophages, thereby mitigating inflammatory responses. Additionally, it promoted T‐cell differentiation to increase the production of anti‐inflammatory factors such as interleukin‐10 [144, 145]. Propionic acid enhances regulatory T‐cell populations [146], which offers protection against the development of PAH [147]. Valeric and butyric acids are potent inhibitors of HDAC, and patients with PAH exhibit reduced copies of the genes that encode the enzyme amidase for valerate and butyrate production [112]. Increased expression of HDAC6 is observed in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells, which promotes their survival and proliferation. [112] HDAC3 can stimulate the expression of inflammatory genes by regulating NF‐kB activity and recruiting monocytes to inflammatory sites. Although the anti‐inflammatory SCFA acetate was not significantly decreased in patients with PAH [148], there was a significant reduction in the number of gene copies that encode the enzyme propionate coenzyme and transferase and acetate‐producing bacteria in patients with PAH [113, 149]. Moreover, SCFAs have been shown to play a critical role in regulating the expression of tight junction proteins, thereby improving intestinal barrier function in various disease models [150, 151, 152, 153]. Consequently, a decrease in SCFAs weakens the intestinal barrier function, promotes oxidative stress, and increases the likelihood of gut inflammation and leakage. This can lead to the release of inflammatory factors into the bloodstream, which can then circulate to the lungs and cause pulmonary vascular remodeling. It has been described that the reduction of SCFA leads to the development of PH, highlighting the potential of increasing SCFA levels as a novel treatment strategy for this disease. In PH mice, consuming a high‐soluble‐fiber diet can decrease the levels of disease‐related bacteria and methanol sulfate in the blood plasma. This is achieved by increasing the abundance of SCFA and propionic acid‐producing bacteria, resulting in lower hypoxia‐induced right ventricular systolic pressure and pulmonary vascular resistance. These changes are accompanied by a reduction in the proportion of mesenchymal macrophages, dendritic cells, and nonclassical monocytes [154]. To conclude, SCFAs are involved in the pathogenesis of PH, while elucidating specific mechanisms is warranted in future studies. Moreover, clinical cohort studies are necessary to identify the associations between circulating levels of SCFAs and patients' prognosis, as well as to explore their potential as biomarkers in PH management.

Other metabolites

Phenylacetylglutamine is a metabolite synthesized by both gut microbiota and host co‐involvement. It has been demonstrated in previous studies to be associated with atherosclerotic CVD, the development of major adverse cardiovascular events, and increasing the risk of stroke through a potentially pro‐thrombotic effect [32, 155, 156, 157]. It raises the question of whether phenylacetylglutamine is involved in the pathogenesis of PH, especially in subtypes associated with thrombosis. However, no study has clarified the role of phenylacetylglutamine in PH, which calls for further efforts in this field. In addition, the value of other metabolites in PH, including bile acids, branched‐chain fatty acids, and biogenic amine, is worth exploring to discover effective treatment modalities of PH. Figure 4 illustrates the knowledge of gut‐microbiota‐associated metabolites in PH.

Figure 4 Gut‐microbiota associated metabolites in PH. TMAO is a potential biomarker in pulmonary hypertension. In our previous cohort study, patients were strictly included, and plasma TMAO levels were measured. High TMAO levels were associated with poor prognosis of patients with pulmonary hypertension. TMAO mainly stems from choline, abundant in red meat and fish. Intestinal flora choline‐TMA lyase can break it down to produce TMA, which enters the liver through the portal vein and is then oxidized by FMOs to generate TMAO ultimately. It has been elucidated that TMAO promoted pulmonary hypertension by upregulating the production of inflammatory factors in macrophages. In addition, a decrease in TMAO level by DMB indicates a preferable effect on pulmonary hypertension, and whether DMB can be used in clinics is worth further discussion. The generation of SCFAs results from complicated interactions between diet and gut microbiota in the intestinal environment. The SCFAs exert anti‐inflammatory effects, resulting in decreased accumulation of alveolar and interstitial lung macrophages. Decreased SCFAs activated the NF‐kB pathway and inhibited the production of anti‐inflammatory factors, which might promote the development of pulmonary hypertension. Phenylacetylglutamine is associated with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, the development of major adverse cardiovascular events, and to increase the risk of stroke through a potentially pro‐thrombotic effect. Whether phenylacetylglutamine is involved in the pathogenesis of PH, especially in subtypes associated with thrombosis, needs to be further investigated. DMB, 3,3‐dimethyl‐1‐butanol; FMO, flavin‐containing monooxygenases; NF‐kB, nuclear factor kappa‐B; PH, pulmonary hypertension; SCFA, hort‐chain fatty acid; TMA, trimethylamine; TMAO, trimethylamine N‐oxide.

CONCLUSION

PH is a complex multifactorial disease characterized by increased pulmonary arterial pressure and vascular resistance leading to right heart failure and death. The intricate nature of the disease, which unfolds within the lung vasculature system, presents a challenging scenario for disease diagnosis and therapeutics. Consequently, the focus is shifting toward understanding the potential biomarkers and molecular targets for efficient prognosis and personalized therapy of PH.

Among these innovative approaches, the potential role and applicability of gut microbiome and its metabolites as novel biomarkers in the pathophysiology and treatment of PH cannot be undermined, as supported by our previous research findings. We have established a potential correlation between the gut microbiome and their metabolites in PH progression. The rapid advancements in large‐scale data technologies like artificial intelligence and machine learning hold enormous potential to revolutionize our understanding of PH. By harnessing these advanced technologies, we can effectively process and utilize complex big data derived from the gut microbiome to identify novel biomarkers, risk factors, and therapeutic targets. However, it is crucial to conduct long‐term longitudinal studies in the future to further validate the gut microbiome as a consistent and reliable biomarker of PH.

The gut microbiome plays a crucial role in modulating host immunity, inflammation, and metabolism, which can have significant implications for understanding PH. Through bacterial components and active metabolites, the gut microbiota interacts with the body's adaptive immune system, contributing to the establishment and maintenance of immune homeostasis [158]. Metabolites, in particular, have been identified as key mediators through which the gut microbiota can influence local and systemic immune responses, potentially contributing to the development of PH.

From this perspective, exploring the relationship between the gut microbiome, its metabolites, and PH might open up a new window for developing targeted and personalized solutions for PH. This shift from a “one‐size‐fits‐all” treatment paradigm toward a patient‐centered approach holds promise for more effective interventions. Various strategies, including fecal microbiota transplantation, probiotics, prebiotics, engineered microbiomes, and dietary interventions, can be explored as therapeutic targets to modify the pathogenesis of PH by modulating metabolites implicated in the disease.

Admittedly, translating these findings from research settings to clinical practice brings challenges. Ensuring appropriate microbiome alterations, monitoring treatment responses, and managing potential side effects are important considerations. Tailoring and personalizing these approaches based on an individual's unique microbiome composition and clinical needs might be a key to successful applications in the future. Figure 5 provides an overview of the potential applications of gut microbiota in PH patients.

Figure 5 Future perspectives in pulmonary hypertension. Fecal and blood samples are utilized for metagenomic and metabolite exploration to discover new biomarkers in pulmonary hypertension. Effective biomarkers for assessing disease severity and prognosis will be developed and combined with traditional assessment methods, including echocardiography, right heart catheterization, and electrocardiogram, and they facilitate comprehensive assessment of disease condition. In addition to traditional treatments, increased beneficial microbiome through dietary intervention, probiotics, or fecal microbial transplantation and decreased harmful microbiome through antibiotics or targeted drugs are promising therapeutic strategies in pulmonary hypertension. Innovations powered by the rapid development of large‐scale data technologies like artificial intelligence and machine learning hold enormous potential to revolutionize our understanding of pulmonary hypertension. Leveraging these advanced technologies can facilitate the processing and application of complex big data from the gut microbiome, metabolites, clinical information, and therapeutic targets to achieve precise management of pulmonary hypertension.

In essence, exploring the gut–lung axis in PH opens up new horizons. It provides many opportunities for novel biomarker discovery, refined risk prediction, innovative therapeutic interventions, and more effective prevention initiatives. However, much remains to be learned about the complex interactions at the gut–lung interface. The future is undoubtedly ripe with opportunities for continued discovery and improved patient care.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Yicheng Yang, Hanwen Zhang, and Jing Xu wrote the manuscript. Yaoyao Wang, Songren Shu, Peizhi Wang, and Shusi Ding revised the manuscript. Yaoyao Wang prepared the figures. Yuan Huang, Lemin Zheng, Changming Xiong, and Yuejin Yang supervised this project. All authors have read the final manuscript and approved it for publication.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors also thank the support of medical illustration and language polishing from MASCU (Medical Association with Science, Creativity, and Unity) Inc., Shenzhen, China. This work was supported by grants from the China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences Initiative for Innovative Medicine (grant 2016‐I2M‐3‐009), High‐level hospital clinical research fees of Fuwai Hospital, CAMS (grant 2022‐GSP‐TS‐6 and 2023‐GSP‐QN‐23), Special Discipline Development Project of Fuwai Hospital, CAMS (grant 2022‐FWTS04), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. 3332023129), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82300345). Jing Xu was supported by the China Scholarship Council (No. 202306210349).

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

This manuscript does not generate any code or data. Supplementary materials (graphical abstract, slides, videos, Chinese translated version, and update materials) may be found in the online DOI or iMeta Science http://www.imeta.science/.
==== Refs
REFERENCES

1 Humbert, Marc , Gabor Kovacs , Marius M. Hoeper , Roberto Badagliacca , Rolf M. F. Berger , Margarita Brida , Jorn Carlsen , et al. 2022. “2022 ESC/ERS Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Pulmonary Hypertension.” European Heart Journal 43 : 3618–3731. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehac237 36017548
2 Thenappan, Thenappan , Mark L. Ormiston , John J. Ryan , and Stephen L. Archer . 2018. “Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension: Pathogenesis and Clinical Management.” BMJ 360 : j5492. 10.1136/bmj.j5492 29540357
3 Poch, David , and Jess Mandel . 2021. “Pulmonary Hypertension.” Annals of Internal Medicine 174 : Itc49–itc64. 10.7326/aitc202104200 33844574
4 Yang, Yicheng , Fan Lin , Zhiqiang Xiao , Bo Sun , Wei Zhao , Bingyang Liu , Lin Xue , and Changming Xiong . 2020. “Investigational Pharmacotherapy and Immunotherapy of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension: An Update.” Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy = Biomedecine & Pharmacotherapie 129 : 110355. 10.1016/j.biopha.2020.110355 32559622
5 Ruopp, Nicole F. , and Barbara A. Cockrill . 2022. “Diagnosis and Treatment of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension: A Review.” JAMA 327 : 1379–1391. 10.1001/jama.2022.4402 35412560
6 Johnson, Shelsey , Natascha Sommer , Katherine Cox‐Flaherty , Norbert Weissmann , Corey E. Ventetuolo , and Bradley A. Maron . 2023. “Pulmonary Hypertension: A Contemporary Review.” American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 208 : 528–548. 10.1164/rccm.202302-0327SO 37450768
7 Balistrieri, Angela , Ayako Makino , and Jason X.‐J. Yuan . 2023. “Pathophysiology and Pathogenic Mechanisms of Pulmonary Hypertension: Role of Membrane Receptors, Ion Channels, and Ca2+ Signaling.” Physiological Reviews 103 : 1827–1897. 10.1152/physrev.00030.2021 36422993
8 Wang, Ranran , Tianyi Yuan , Jianmei Wang , Yucai Chen , Jiuliang Zhao , Mengtao Li , Lianhua Fang , and Guanhua Du . 2022. “Immunity and Inflammation in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension: From Pathophysiology Mechanisms to Treatment Perspective.” Pharmacological Research 180 : 106238. 10.1016/j.phrs.2022.106238 35504356
9 Zhang, Meng‐Qi , Chenchen Wang , Xiaobin Pang , Junzhuo Shi , Haoran Li , Xinmei Xie , Zhe Wang , et al. 2023. “Role of Macrophages in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.” Frontiers in Immunology 14 : 1152881. 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1152881 37153557
10 Cuthbertson, Iona , Nicholas W. Morrell , and Paola Caruso . 2023. “BMPR2 Mutation and Metabolic Reprogramming in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.” Circulation Research 132 : 109–126. 10.1161/circresaha.122.321554 36603064
11 Pokharel, Marissa D. , David P. Marciano , Panfeng Fu , Maria Clara Franco , Hoshang Unwalla , Kim Tieu , Jeffrey R. Fineman , Ting Wang , and Stephen M. Black . 2023. “Metabolic Reprogramming, Oxidative Stress, and Pulmonary Hypertension.” Redox Biology 64 : 102797. 10.1016/j.redox.2023.102797 37392518
12 Rabinovitch, Marlene , Christophe Guignabert , Marc Humbert , and Mark R. Nicolls . 2014. “Inflammation and Immunity in the Pathogenesis of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.” Circulation Research 115 : 165–175. 10.1161/circresaha.113.301141 24951765
13 Mandras, Stacy A. , Hirsch S. Mehta , and Anjali Vaidya . 2020. “Pulmonary Hypertension: A Brief Guide for Clinicians.” Mayo Clinic Proceedings 95 : 1978–1988. 10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.04.039 32861339
14 Kim, Nick H. , Marion Delcroix , Xavier Jais , Michael M. Madani , Hiromi Matsubara , Eckhard Mayer , Takeshi Ogo , Victor F. Tapson Hossein Ardeschir Ghofrani , and David P. Jenkins . 2019. “Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension.” European Respiratory Journal 53 : 1801915. 10.1183/13993003.01915-2018 30545969
15 Papamatheakis, Demosthenes G. , David S. Poch , Timothy M. Fernandes , Kim M. Kerr , Nick H. Kim , and Peter F. Fedullo . 2020. “Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension.” Journal of the American College of Cardiology 76 : 2155–2169. 10.1016/j.jacc.2020.08.074 33121723
16 Delcroix, Marion , Adam Torbicki , Deepa Gopalan , Olivier Sitbon , Frederikus A. Klok , Irene Lang , David Jenkins , et al. 2021. “ERS Statement on Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension.” European Respiratory Journal 57 : 2002828. 10.1183/13993003.02828-2020 33334946
17 Kazemian, Negin , Morteza Mahmoudi , Frank Halperin , Joseph C. Wu , and Sepideh Pakpour . 2020. “Gut Microbiota and Cardiovascular Disease: Opportunities and Challenges.” Microbiome 8 : 36. 10.1186/s40168-020-00821-0 32169105
18 Perler, Bryce K. , Elliot S. Friedman , and Gary D. Wu . 2023. “The Role of the Gut Microbiota in the Relationship Between Diet and Human Health.” Annual Review of Physiology 85 : 449–468. 10.1146/annurev-physiol-031522-092054
19 Valdes, Ana M. , Jens Walter , Eran Segal , and Tim D. Spector . 2018. “Role of the Gut Microbiota in Nutrition and Health.” BMJ 361 : k2179. 10.1136/bmj.k2179 29899036
20 Ley, Ruth E. , Catherine A. Lozupone , Micah Hamady , Rob Knight , and Jeffrey I. Gordon . 2008. “Worlds Within Worlds: Evolution of the Vertebrate Gut Microbiota.” Nature Reviews Microbiology 6 : 776–788. 10.1038/nrmicro1978 18794915
21 Ducarmon, Q. R. , R. D. Zwittink , B. V. H. Hornung , W. van Schaik , V. B. Young , and E. J. Kuijper . 2019. “Gut Microbiota and Colonization Resistance Against Bacterial Enteric Infection.” Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 83 : e00007–19. 10.1128/mmbr.00007-19 31167904
22 Rooks, Michelle G. , and Wendy S. Garrett . 2016. “Gut Microbiota, Metabolites and Host Immunity.” Nature Reviews Immunology 16 : 341–352. 10.1038/nri.2016.42
23 O'Donnell, Joanne A. , Tenghao Zheng , Guillaume Meric , and Francine Z. Marques . 2023. “The Gut Microbiome and Hypertension.” Nature Reviews Nephrology 19 : 153–167. 10.1038/s41581-022-00654-0 36631562
24 Berg, Gabriele , Daria Rybakova , Doreen Fischer , Tomislav Cernava , Marie‐Christine Champomier Vergès , Trevor Charles , Xiaoyulong Chen , et al. 2020. “Microbiome Definition Re‐Visited: Old Concepts and New Challenges.” Microbiome 8 : 103. 10.1186/s40168-020-00875-0 32605663
25 Jie, Zhuye , Huihua Xia , Shilong Zhong , Qiang Feng , Shenghui Li , Suisha Liang , Huanzi Zhong , et al. 2017. “The Gut Microbiome in Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease.” Nature Communications 8 : 845. 10.1038/s41467-017-00900-1
26 Li, Jing , Fangqing Zhao , Yidan Wang , Junru Chen , Jie Tao , Gang Tian , Shouling Wu , et al. 2017. “Gut Microbiota Dysbiosis Contributes to the Development of Hypertension.” Microbiome 5 : 14. 10.1186/s40168-016-0222-x 28143587
27 Kummen, Martin , Cristiane C. K. Mayerhofer , Beate Vestad , Kaspar Broch , Ayodeji Awoyemi , Christopher Storm‐Larsen , Thor Ueland , Arne Yndestad , Johannes R. Hov , and Marius Trøseid . 2018. “Gut Microbiota Signature in Heart Failure Defined From Profiling of 2 Independent Cohorts.” Journal of the American College of Cardiology 71 : 1184–1186. 10.1016/j.jacc.2017.12.057 29519360
28 Kim, Seungbum , Katya Rigatto , Marcelo B. Gazzana , Marli M. Knorst , Elaine M. Richards , Carl J. Pepine , and Mohan K. Raizada . 2020. “Altered Gut Microbiome Profile in Patients With Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.” Hypertension 75 : 1063–1071. 10.1161/hypertensionaha.119.14294 32088998
29 Wang, Zeneng , and Yongzhong Zhao . 2018. “Gut Microbiota Derived Metabolites in Cardiovascular Health and Disease.” Protein Cell 9 : 416–431. 10.1007/s13238-018-0549-0 29725935
30 Wu, Jiayu , Kai Wang , Xuemei Wang , Yanli Pang , and Changtao Jiang . 2021. “The Role of the Gut Microbiome and Its Metabolites in Metabolic Diseases.” Protein Cell 12 : 360–373. 10.1007/s13238-020-00814-7 33346905
31 Kurilshikov, Alexander , Inge C. L. van den Munckhof , Lianmin Chen , Marc J. Bonder , Kiki Schraa , Joost H. W. Rutten , Niels P. Riksen , et al. 2019. “Gut Microbial Associations to Plasma Metabolites Linked to Cardiovascular Phenotypes and Risk.” Circulation Research 124 : 1808–1820. 10.1161/circresaha.118.314642 30971183
32 Nemet, Ina , Prasenjit Prasad Saha , Nilaksh Gupta , Weifei Zhu , Kymberleigh A. Romano , Sarah M. Skye , Tomas Cajka , et al. 2020. “A Cardiovascular Disease‐Linked Gut Microbial Metabolite Acts Via Adrenergic Receptors.” Cell 180 : 862–877.e22. 10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.016 32142679
33 Gao, Jianing , Yanghui Chen , Huiqing Wang , Xin Li , Ke Li , Yangkai Xu , Xianwei Xie , et al. 2023. “Gasdermin D Deficiency in Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells Ameliorates Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Through Reducing Putrescine Synthesis.” Advanced Science 10 : e2204038. 10.1002/advs.202204038 36567267
34 Cui, Hongtu , Yanghui Chen , Ke Li , Rui Zhan , Mingming Zhao , Yangkai Xu , Zhiyong Lin , et al. 2021. “Untargeted Metabolomics Identifies Succinate as a Biomarker and Therapeutic Target in Aortic Aneurysm and Dissection.” European Heart Journal 42 : 4373–4385. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehab605 34534287
35 Li, Dang , Yilang Ke , Rui Zhan , Changjie Liu , Mingming Zhao , Aiping Zeng , Xiaoyun Shi , et al. 2018. “Trimethylamine‐N‐Oxide Promotes Brain Aging and Cognitive Impairment in Mice.” Aging Cell 17 : e12768. 10.1111/acel.12768 29749694
36 Ke, Yilang , Dang Li , Mingming Zhao , Changjie Liu , Jia Liu , Aiping Zeng , Xiaoyun Shi , et al. 2018. “Gut Flora‐Dependent Metabolite Trimethylamine‐N‐Oxide Accelerates Endothelial Cell Senescence and Vascular Aging Through Oxidative Stress.” Free Radical Biology and Medicine 116 : 88–100. 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2018.01.007 29325896
37 Xu, Jie , Aichun Cheng , Bo Song , Mingming Zhao , Jing Xue , Anxin Wang , Liye Dai , et al. 2022. “Trimethylamine N‐Oxide and Stroke Recurrence Depends on Ischemic Stroke Subtypes.” Stroke 53 : 1207–1215. 10.1161/strokeaha.120.031443 34794334
38 Zhao, Mingming , Haoran Wei , Chenze Li , Rui Zhan , Changjie Liu , Jianing Gao , Yaodong Yi , et al. 2022. “Gut Microbiota Production of Trimethyl‐5‐Aminovaleric Acid Reduces Fatty Acid Oxidation and Accelerates Cardiac Hypertrophy.” Nature Communications 13 : 1757. 10.1038/s41467-022-29060-7
39 Zhao, Mingming , Lin Zhao , Xuelian Xiong , Yuan He , Wei Huang , Zihao Liu , Liang Ji , et al. 2020. “TMAVA, A Metabolite of Intestinal Microbes, is Increased in Plasma From Patients With Liver Steatosis, Inhibits γ‐Butyrobetaine Hydroxylase, and Exacerbates Fatty Liver in Mice.” Gastroenterology 158 : 2266–2281.e27. 10.1053/j.gastro.2020.02.033 32105727
40 Yang, Yicheng , Qixian Zeng , Jianing Gao , Beilan Yang , Jingjing Zhou , Ke Li , Li Li , et al. 2022. “High‐Circulating Gut Microbiota‐Dependent Metabolite Trimethylamine N‐Oxide is Associated With Poor Prognosis in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.” European Heart Journal Open 2 : oeac021. 10.1093/ehjopen/oeac021 36071697
41 Yang, Yicheng , Jing Xu , Jingjing Zhou , Jing Xue , Jianing Gao , Xinn Li , Bo Sun , et al. 2022. “High Betaine and Dynamic Increase of Betaine Levels are Both Associated With Poor Prognosis of Patients With Pulmonary Hypertension.” Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine 9 : 852009. 10.3389/fcvm.2022.852009 35433890
42 Budden, Kurtis F. , Shaan L. Gellatly , David L. A. Wood , Matthew A. Cooper , Mark Morrison , Philip Hugenholtz , and Philip M. Hansbro . 2017. “Emerging Pathogenic Links Between Microbiota and the Gut‐Lung Axis.” Nature Reviews Microbiology 15 : 55–63. 10.1038/nrmicro.2016.142 27694885
43 Turner‐Warwick, M. 1968. “Fibrosing Alveolitis and Chronic Liver Disease.” QJM: An International Journal of Medicine 37 : 133–149.
44 Kraft, Sumner C. , Richard H. Earle , Michele Roesler , and John R. Esterly . 1976. “Unexplained Bronchopulmonary Disease With Inflammatory Bowel Disease.” Archives of Internal Medicine 136 : 454–459. 10.1001/archinte.1976.03630040056012 1267553
45 Cooke, Kenneth R. , Geoffrey R. Hill , Armin Gerbitz , Lester Kobzik , Thomas R. Martin , James M. Crawford , Joanne P. Brewer , and James L. M. Ferrara . 2000. “Hyporesponsiveness Of Donor Cells to Lipopolysaccharide Stimulation Reduces the Severity of Experimental Idiopathic Pneumonia Syndrome: Potential Role for a Gut‐Lung Axis of Inflammation.” The Journal of Immunology 165 : 6612–6619. 10.4049/jimmunol.165.11.6612 11086106
46 Roussos, A. , P. Koursarakos , D. Patsopoulos , I. Gerogianni , and N. Philippou . 2003. “Increased Prevalence of Irritable Bowel Syndrome in Patients With Bronchial Asthma.” Respiratory Medicine 97 : 75–79. 10.1053/rmed.2001.1409 12556015
47 Tichelaar, Jay W. , Lorena Lim , Robert H. Costa , and Jeffrey A. Whitsett . 1999. “HNF‐3/Forkhead Homologue‐4 Influences Lung Morphogenesis and Respiratory Epithelial Cell Differentiation In Vivo.” Developmental Biology 213 : 405–417. 10.1006/dbio.1999.9380 10479457
48 Okubo, Tadashi , and Brigid L. M. Hogan . 2004. “Hyperactive Wnt Signaling Changes the Developmental Potential of Embryonic Lung Endoderm.” Journal of Biology 3 : 11. 10.1186/jbiol3 15186480
49 Brown, Eric L. , Heather T. Essigmann , Kristi L. Hoffman , Noah W. Palm , Sarah M. Gunter , Joel M. Sederstrom , Joseph F. Petrosino , et al. 2020. “Impact of Diabetes on the Gut and Salivary IgA Microbiomes.” Infection and Immunity 88 : e00301–20. 10.1128/iai.00301-20 32900816
50 Bunker, Jeffrey J. , Theodore M. Flynn , Jason C. Koval , Dustin G. Shaw , Marlies Meisel , Benjamin D. McDonald , Isabel E. Ishizuka , et al. 2015. “Innate and Adaptive Humoral Responses Coat Distinct Commensal Bacteria With Immunoglobulin A.” Immunity 43 : 541–553. 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.08.007 26320660
51 Luo, Junming , Zhaoqian Liu , and Chin Y. Eugene . 2008. “Overexpression of Pulmonary Surfactant Protein A Like Molecules in Inflammatory Bowel Disease Tissues.” Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban 33 : 979–986.19060364
52 Rothenberg, Marc E. , Anil Mishra , Eric B. Brandt , and Simon P. Hogan . 2001. “Gastrointestinal Eosinophils.” Immunological Reviews 179 : 139–155. 10.1034/j.1600-065x.2001.790114.x 11292017
53 Harrington, P. M. , D. J. Newton , C. M. Williams , J. A. Hunt , R. J. Dearman , I. Kimber , J. W. Coleman , and B. F. Flanagan . 1999. “Eotaxin and Eotaxin Receptor (CCR3) Expression in Sephadex Particle‐Induced Rat Lung Inflammation.” International Journal of Experimental Pathology 80 : 177–185. 10.1046/j.1365-2613.1999.00112.x 10469273
54 Amoroso, Chiara , Federica Perillo , Francesco Strati , Massimo Fantini , Flavio Caprioli , and Federica Facciotti . 2020. “The Role of Gut Microbiota Biomodulators on Mucosal Immunity and Intestinal Inflammation.” Cells 9 : 1234. 10.3390/cells9051234 32429359
55 Guo, Haoyue , Lishu Zhao , Junjie Zhu , Peixin Chen , Hao Wang , Minlin Jiang , Xiaogang Liu , et al. 2022. “Microbes in Lung Cancer Initiation, Treatment, and Outcome: Boon or Bane?” Seminars in Cancer Biology 86 : 1190–1206. 10.1016/j.semcancer.2021.05.025 34029741
56 Golubovskaya, Vita , and Lijun Wu . 2016. “Different Subsets of T Cells, Memory, Effector Functions, and CAR‐T Immunotherapy.” Cancers 8 : 36. 10.3390/cancers8030036 26999211
57 Sanna, Serena , Natalie R. van Zuydam , Anubha Mahajan , Alexander Kurilshikov , Arnau Vich Vila , Urmo Võsa , Zlatan Mujagic , et al. 2019. “Causal Relationships Among the Gut Microbiome, Short‐Chain Fatty Acids and Metabolic Diseases.” Nature Genetics 51 : 600–605. 10.1038/s41588-019-0350-x 30778224
58 Makki, Kassem , Edward C. Deehan , Jens Walter , and Fredrik Bäckhed . 2018. “The Impact of Dietary Fiber on Gut Microbiota in Host Health and Disease.” Cell Host & Microbe 23 : 705–715. 10.1016/j.chom.2018.05.012 29902436
59 Koh, Ara , Filipe De Vadder , Petia Kovatcheva‐Datchary , and Fredrik Bäckhed . 2016. “From Dietary Fiber to Host Physiology: Short‐Chain Fatty Acids as Key Bacterial Metabolites.” Cell 165 : 1332–1345. 10.1016/j.cell.2016.05.041 27259147
60 Wu, Wei , Mingming Sun , Feidi Chen , Anthony T. Cao , Han Liu , Ye Zhao , Xiangsheng Huang , et al. 2017. “Microbiota Metabolite Short‐Chain Fatty Acid Acetate Promotes Intestinal IgA Response to Microbiota Which is Mediated By GPR43.” Mucosal Immunology 10 : 946–956. 10.1038/mi.2016.114 27966553
61 Potgieter, Marnie , Janette Bester , Douglas B. Kell , and Etheresia Pretorius . 2015. “The Dormant Blood Microbiome in Chronic, Inflammatory Diseases.” FEMS Microbiology Reviews 39 : 567–591. 10.1093/femsre/fuv013 25940667
62 Tan, Jian , Craig McKenzie , Maria Potamitis , Alison N. Thorburn , Charles R. Mackay , and Laurence Macia . 2014. “The Role of Short‐Chain Fatty Acids in Health and Disease.” Advances in Immunology 121 : 91–119. 10.1016/b978-0-12-800100-4.00003-9 24388214
63 Smith, Patrick M. , Michael R. Howitt , Nicolai Panikov , Monia Michaud , Carey Ann Gallini , Mohammad Bohlooly‐Y , Jonathan N. Glickman , and Wendy S. Garrett . 2013. “The Microbial Metabolites, Short‐Chain Fatty Acids, Regulate Colonic Treg Cell Homeostasis.” Science 341 : 569–573. 10.1126/science.1241165 23828891
64 Trompette, Aurélien , Eva S. Gollwitzer , Koshika Yadava , Anke K. Sichelstiel , Norbert Sprenger , Catherine Ngom‐Bru , Carine Blanchard , et al. 2014. “Gut Microbiota Metabolism of Dietary Fiber Influences Allergic Airway Disease and Hematopoiesis.” Nature Medicine 20 : 159–166. 10.1038/nm.3444
65 Byndloss, Mariana X. , Erin E. Olsan , Fabian Rivera‐Chávez , Connor R. Tiffany , Stephanie A. Cevallos , Kristen L. Lokken , Teresa P. Torres , et al. 2017. “Microbiota‐Activated PPAR‐γ Signaling Inhibits Dysbiotic Enterobacteriaceae Expansion.” Science 357 : 570–575. 10.1126/science.aam9949 28798125
66 Cait, A. , M. R. Hughes , F. Antignano , J. Cait , P. A. Dimitriu , K. R. Maas , L. A. Reynolds , et al. 2018. “Microbiome‐Driven Allergic Lung Inflammation is Ameliorated By Short‐Chain Fatty Acids.” Mucosal Immunology 11 : 785–795. 10.1038/mi.2017.75 29067994
67 Wang, Zeneng , Elizabeth Klipfell , Brian J. Bennett , Robert Koeth , Bruce S. Levison , Brandon Dugar , Ariel E. Feldstein , et al. 2011. “Gut Flora Metabolism of Phosphatidylcholine Promotes Cardiovascular Disease.” Nature 472 : 57–63. 10.1038/nature09922 21475195
68 Hernandez, Diana , Azara Janmohamed , Pritpal Chandan , Ian R. Phillips , and Elizabeth A. Shephard . 2004. “Organization and Evolution of the Flavin‐Containing Monooxygenase Genes of Human and Mouse: Identification of Novel Gene and Pseudogene Clusters.” Pharmacogenetics 14 : 117–130. 10.1097/00008571-200402000-00006 15077013
69 Velasquez, Manuel , Ali Ramezani , Alotaibi Manal , and Dominic Raj . 2016. “Trimethylamine N‐Oxide: The Good, the Bad and the Unknown.” Toxins 8 : 326. 10.3390/toxins8110326 27834801
70 Sun, Xiaolei , Xuefei Jiao , Yarong Ma , Yong Liu , Lei Zhang , Yanzheng He , and Yunhui Chen . 2016. “Trimethylamine N‐Oxide Induces Inflammation and Endothelial Dysfunction in Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells Via Activating ROS‐TXNIP‐NLRP3 Inflammasome.” Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 481 : 63–70. 10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.11.017 27833015
71 Boini, Krishna M. , Tahir Hussain , Pinlan Li , and Sai S. Koka . 2017. “Trimethylamine‐N‐Oxide Instigates NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation and Endothelial Dysfunction.” Cell Physiology and Biochemistry 44 : 152–162. 10.1159/000484623
72 Berger, Martin , Marcus E. Kleber , Graciela E. Delgado , Winfred März , Meinitzer Andreas , Peter Hellstern , Nikolaus Marx , and Katharina A. Schuett . 2020. “Trimethylamine N‐Oxide and Adenosine Diphosphate‐Induced Platelet Reactivity are Independent Risk Factors for Cardiovascular and All‐Cause Mortality.” Circulation Research 126 : 660–662. 10.1161/circresaha.119.316214 31958034
73 Frangogiannis, Nikolaos G. 2020. “Transforming Growth Factor‐β in Tissue Fibrosis.” Journal of Experimental Medicine 217 : e20190103. 10.1084/jem.20190103 32997468
74 Kojonazarov, Baktybek , Tatyana Novoyatleva , Mario Boehm , Chris Happe , Zaneta Sibinska , Xia Tian , Amna Sajjad , et al. 2017. “p38 MAPK Inhibition Improves Heart Function in Pressure‐Loaded Right Ventricular Hypertrophy.” American Journal of Respiratory Cell and Molecular Biology 57 : 603–614. 10.1165/rcmb.2016-0374OC 28657795
75 Steed, Ashley L. , George P. Christophi , Gerard E. Kaiko , Lulu Sun , Victoria M. Goodwin , Umang Jain , Ekaterina Esaulova , et al. 2017. “The Microbial Metabolite Desaminotyrosine Protects From Influenza Through Type I Interferon.” Science 357 : 498–502. 10.1126/science.aam5336 28774928
76 Brown, J. Mark , and Stanley L. Hazen . 2018. “Microbial Modulation of Cardiovascular Disease.” Nature Reviews Microbiology 16 : 171–181. 10.1038/nrmicro.2017.149 29307889
77 Di Lorenzo, Flaviana , Katarzyna A. Duda , Rosa Lanzetta , Alba Silipo , Cristina De Castro , and Antonio Molinaro . 2022. “A Journey From Structure to Function of Bacterial Lipopolysaccharides.” Chemical Reviews 122 : 15767–15821. 10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c01321 34286971
78 Yang, Ruey Bing , Melanie R. Mark , Alane Gray , Arthur Huang , Minghong Xie , Min Zhang , Audrey Goddard , William I. Wood , Austin L. Gurney , and Paul J. Godowski . 1998. “Toll‐Like Receptor‐2 Mediates Lipopolysaccharide‐Induced Cellular Signalling.” Nature 395 : 284–288. 10.1038/26239 9751057
79 Yamamoto, Masahiro , Shintaro Sato , Hiroaki Hemmi , Katsuaki Hoshino , Tsuneyasu Kaisho , Hideki Sanjo , Osamu Takeuchi , et al. 2003. “Role of Adaptor TRIF in the MyD88‐Independent Toll‐Like Receptor Signaling Pathway.” Science 301 : 640–643. 10.1126/science.1087262 12855817
80 Han, Kejun , Xiaoqin Su , Liangguo Xu , Lianghua Bin , Jun Zhang , and Hongbing Shu . 2004. “Mechanisms of the TRIF‐induced Interferon‐Stimulated Response Element and NF‐κB Activation and Apoptosis Pathways.” Journal of Biological Chemistry 279 : 15652–15661. 10.1074/jbc.M311629200 14739303
81 Kim, Ho Min , Beom Seok Park , Jung‐In Kim , Sung Eun Kim , Judong Lee , Se Cheol Oh , Purevjav Enkhbayar , et al. 2007. “Crystal Structure of the TLR4‐MD‐2 Complex With Bound Endotoxin Antagonist Eritoran.” Cell 130 : 906–917. 10.1016/j.cell.2007.08.002 17803912
82 Chen, Hong , Chunxue Bai , and Xiangdong Wang . 2010. “The Value of the Lipopolysaccharide‐Induced Acute Lung Injury Model in Respiratory Medicine.” Expert Review of Respiratory Medicine 4 : 773–783. 10.1586/ers.10.71 21128752
83 Gao, Jie , Huifang Chen , Liuyue Xu , Shanglin Li , Huijun Yan , Lifang Jiang , Wenli Cheng , and Zhenyou Jiang . 2023. “Effects of Intestinal Microorganisms on Influenza‐Infected Mice With Antibiotic‐Induced Intestinal Dysbiosis, Through the TLR7 Signaling Pathway.” Frontiers in Bioscience (Landmark Edition) 28 : 43. 10.31083/j.fbl2803043 37005752
84 Wu, Sha , Zhenyou Jiang , Yifan Sun , Bin Yu , Jia Chen , Congqi Dai , Xianlin Wu , Xiaolong Tang , and Xiaoyin Chen . 2013. “Microbiota Regulates the TLR7 Signaling Pathway Against Respiratory Tract Influenza A Virus Infection.” Current Microbiology 67 : 414–422. 10.1007/s00284-013-0380-z 23677145
85 Haddad, John J. 2002. “Science Review: Redox and Oxygen‐Sensitive Transcription Factors in the Regulation of Oxidant‐Mediated Lung Injury: Role for Nuclear Factor‐κB.” Critical Care 6 : 481–490. 10.1186/cc1839 12493069
86 Li, Xiaojuan , Yi Bai , Yulong Ma , and Yan Li . 2023. “Ameliorating Effects of Berberine on Sepsis‐Associated Lung Inflammation Induced by Lipopolysaccharide: Molecular Mechanisms and Preclinical Evidence.” Pharmacological Reports 75 : 805–816. 10.1007/s43440-023-00492-2 37184743
87 Poynter, Matthew E. 2019. “Debugging Obesity‐Related Airway Hyperresponsiveness by Modulating the Microbiome.” American Journal of Respiratory Cell and Molecular Biology 61 : 665–666. 10.1165/rcmb.2019-0193ED 31185177
88 Shore, Stephanie A. , and Youngji Cho . 2016. “Obesity and Asthma: Microbiome‐Metabolome Interactions.” American Journal of Respiratory Cell and Molecular Biology 54 : 609–617. 10.1165/rcmb.2016-0052PS 26949916
89 Wypych, Tomasz P. , Lakshanie C. Wickramasinghe , and Benjamin J. Marsland . 2019. “The Influence of the Microbiome on Respiratory Health.” Nature Immunology 20 : 1279–1290. 10.1038/s41590-019-0451-9 31501577
90 Haglund, U. , A. Falk , and H. Myrvold . 1980. “Pulmonary Vascular Reactions in Experimental Septicemia, A Preliminary Report.” Acta Chirurgica Scandinavica. Supplementum 499 : 31–43.7006284
91 Mizutani, Taketoshi , Aya Ishizaka , Michiko Koga , Kazuhiko Ikeuchi , Makoto Saito , Eisuke Adachi , Seiya Yamayoshi , et al. 2022. “Correlation Analysis Between Gut Microbiota Alterations and the Cytokine Response in Patients With Coronavirus Disease During Hospitalization.” Microbiology Spectrum 10 : e0168921. 10.1128/spectrum.01689-21 35254122
92 Balakrishnan, Baskar , David Luckey , and Veena Taneja . 2019. “Autoimmunity‐Associated Gut Commensals Modulate Gut Permeability and Immunity in Humanized Mice.” Military Medicine 184 : 529–536. 10.1093/milmed/usy309 30901468
93 Liu, Yang , Shu Mei Teo , Guillaume Méric , Howard H. F. Tang , Qiyun Zhu , Jon G. Sanders , Yoshiki Vázquez‐Baeza , et al. 2023. “The Gut Microbiome is a Significant Risk Factor for Future Chronic Lung Disease.” Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 151 : 943–952. 10.1016/j.jaci.2022.12.810 36587850
94 Luo, Mei , Yong Liu , Pengfei Wu , Dong Xia Luo , Qun Sun , Han Zheng , Richard Hu , et al. 2017. “Alternation of Gut Microbiota in Patients With Pulmonary Tuberculosis.” Frontiers in Physiology 8 : 822. 10.3389/fphys.2017.00822 29204120
95 Hu, Yongfeng , Qianting Yang , Bo Liu , Jie Dong , Lilian Sun , Yafang Zhu , Haoxiang Su , et al. 2019. “Gut Microbiota Associated With Pulmonary Tuberculosis and Dysbiosis Caused By Anti‐Tuberculosis Drugs.” Journal of Infection 78 : 317–322. 10.1016/j.jinf.2018.08.006 30107196
96 Naidoo, Charissa C. , Georgina R. Nyawo , Benjamin G. Wu , Gerhard Walzl , Robin M. Warren , Leopoldo N. Segal , and Grant Theron . 2019. “The Microbiome and Tuberculosis: State of the Art, Potential Applications, and Defining the Clinical Research Agenda.” The Lancet Respiratory Medicine 7 : 892–906. 10.1016/s2213-2600(18)30501-0 30910543
97 Dilantika, Charisma , Endang R. Sedyaningsih , Matthew R. Kasper , Magdarina Agtini , Erlin Listiyaningsih , Timothy M. Uyeki , Timothy H. Burgess , Patrick J. Blair , and Shannon D. Putnam . 2010. “Influenza Virus Infection Among Pediatric Patients Reporting Diarrhea and Influenza‐Like Illness.” BMC Infectious Diseases 10 : 3. 10.1186/1471-2334-10-3 20053294
98 Groves, Helen T. , Leah Cuthbertson , Phillip James , Miriam F. Moffatt , Michael J. Cox , and John S. Tregoning . 2018. “Respiratory Disease Following Viral Lung Infection Alters the Murine Gut Microbiota.” Frontiers in Immunology 9 : 182. 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00182 29483910
99 Coopersmith, Craig M. , Paul E. Stromberg , Christopher G. Davis , W. Michael Dunne , Daniel M. Amiot, 2nd , Irene E. Karl , Richard S. Hotchkiss , and Timothy G. Buchman . 2003. “Sepsis From Pseudomonas aeruginosa Pneumonia Decreases Intestinal Proliferation and Induces Gut Epithelial Cell Cycle Arrest.” Critical Care Medicine 31 : 1630–1637. 10.1097/01.ccm.0000055385.29232.11 12794397
100 Abdelgawad, Ahmed , Teodora Nicola , Isaac Martin , Brian A. Halloran , Kosuke Tanaka , Comfort Y. Adegboye , Pankaj Jain , et al. 2023. “Antimicrobial Peptides Modulate Lung Injury by Altering the Intestinal Microbiota.” Microbiome 11 : 226. 10.1186/s40168-023-01673-0 37845716
101 Kirschner, Sarah K. , Nicolaas E. P. Deutz , Renate Jonker , Steven W. M. Olde Damink , Rajesh I. Harrykissoon , Anthony J. Zachria , Srinivasan Dasarathy , and Mariëlle P. K. J. Engelen . 2021. “Intestinal Function is Impaired in Patients With Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.” Clinical Nutrition 40 : 2270–2277. 10.1016/j.clnu.2020.10.010 33873268
102 Zhao, Min , Fei Shao , Dou Yu , Jiaqi Zhang , Zhen Liu , Jiangwen Ma , Pengyan Xia , and Shuo Wang . 2022. “Maturation and Specialization of Group 2 Innate Lymphoid Cells Through the Lung‐Gut Axis.” Nature Communications 13 : 7600. 10.1038/s41467-022-35347-6
103 Huang, Yuefeng , Kairui Mao , Xi Chen , Ming‐An Sun , Takeshi Kawabe , Weizhe Li , Nicholas Usher , et al. 2018. “S1P‐Dependent Interorgan Trafficking of Group 2 Innate Lymphoid Cells Supports Host Defense.” Science 359 : 114–119. 10.1126/science.aam5809 29302015
104 Min, Min , Lihua Peng , Yunsheng Yang , Mingzhou Guo , Weifeng Wang , and Gang Sun . 2014. “MicroRNA‐155 is Involved in the Pathogenesis of Ulcerative Colitis by Targeting FOXO3a.” Inflammatory Bowel Diseases 20 : 652–659. 10.1097/mib.0000000000000009 24583476
105 Rao, Roshni , Prakash Nagarkatti , and Mitzi Nagarkatti . 2014. “Staphylococcal Enterotoxin B‐Induced MicroRNA‐155 Targets SOCS1 to Promote Acute Inflammatory Lung Injury.” Infection and Immunity 82 : 2971–2979. 10.1128/iai.01666-14 24778118
106 Yang, Yongzhi , Yanlei Ma , Chenzhang Shi , Hongqi Chen , Huizhen Zhang , Niwei Chen , Peng Zhang , et al. 2013. “Overexpression of miR‐21 in Patients With Ulcerative Colitis Impairs Intestinal Epithelial Barrier Function Through Targeting the Rho GTPase RhoB.” Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 434 : 746–752. 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.03.122 23583411
107 Hong, Yinghui , Mingliang Ye , Fan Wang , Jun Fang , Chun Wang , Jie Luo , Jialiang Liu , et al. 2021. “MiR‐21‐3p Promotes Hepatocellular Carcinoma Progression Via SMAD7/YAP1 Regulation.” Frontiers in Oncology 11 : 642030. 10.3389/fonc.2021.642030 33763375
108 Tang, Jinming , Xu Li , Tianli Cheng , and Jie Wu . 2021. “miR‐21‐5p/SMAD7 Axis Promotes the Progress of Lung Cancer.” Thoracic Cancer 12 : 2307–2313. 10.1111/1759-7714.14060 34254453
109 Zhang, Chenting , Tingting Zhang , Yue Xing , Wenju Lu , Jiyuan Chen , Xiaoyun Luo , Xuefen Wu , et al. 2023. “Airway Delivery of Streptococcus salivarius is Sufficient to Induce Experimental Pulmonary Hypertension in Rats.” British Journal of Pharmacology 180 : 2102–2119. 10.1111/bph.16064 36869838
110 Jose, Arun , Senu Apewokin , Walaa E. Hussein , Nicholas J. Ollberding , Jean M. Elwing , and David B. Haslam . 2022. “A Unique Gut Microbiota Signature in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension: A Pilot Study.” Pulmonary Circulation 12 : e12051. 10.1002/pul2.12051 35506110
111 Ikubo, Yumiko , Takayuki Jujo Sanada , Koji Hosomi , Jonguk Park , Akira Naito , Hiroki Shoji , Tomoko Misawa , et al. 2022. “Altered Gut Microbiota and Its Association With Inflammation in Patients With Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension: A Single‐Center Observational Study in Japan.” BMC Pulmonary Medicine 22 : 138. 10.1186/s12890-022-01932-0 35395844
112 Moutsoglou, Daphne M. , Jasmine Tatah , Sasha Z. Prisco , Kurt W. Prins , Christopher Staley , Sharon Lopez , Madelyn Blake , et al. 2023. “Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension Patients Have a Proinflammatory Gut Microbiome and Altered Circulating Microbial Metabolites.” American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 207 : 740–756. 10.1164/rccm.202203-0490OC 36343281
113 Callejo, María , Gema Mondejar‐Parreño , Bianca Barreira , José L. Izquierdo‐Garcia , Daniel Morales‐Cano , Sergio Esquivel‐Ruiz , Laura Moreno , et al. 2018. “Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension Affects the Rat Gut Microbiome.” Scientific Reports 8 : 9681. 10.1038/s41598-018-27682-w 29946072
114 Sanada, Takayuki J. , Koji Hosomi , Hiroki Shoji , Jonguk Park , Akira Naito , Yumiko Ikubo , Asako Yanagisawa , et al. 2020. “Gut Microbiota Modification Suppresses the Development of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension in an SU5416/Hypoxia Rat Model.” Pulmonary Circulation 10 : 1–10. 10.1177/2045894020929147
115 Sharma, Ravindra K. , Aline C. Oliveira , Tao Yang , Marianthi M. Karas , Jing Li , Gilberto O. Lobaton , Victor P. Aquino , et al. 2020. “Gut Pathology and Its Rescue By ACE2 (Angiotensin‐Converting Enzyme 2) in Hypoxia‐Induced Pulmonary Hypertension.” Hypertension 76 : 206–216. 10.1161/hypertensionaha.120.14931 32418496
116 Sharma, Ravindra K. , Aline C. Oliveira , Tao Yang , Seungbum Kim , Jasenka Zubcevic , Victor Aquino , Gilberto O. Lobaton , et al. 2020. “Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension‐Associated Changes in Gut Pathology and Microbiota.” ERJ Open Research 6 : 00253–2019. 10.1183/23120541.00253-2019
117 Hong, Wei , Qiudi Mo , Luyao Wang , Fang Peng , Yuming Zhou , Weifeng Zou , Ruiting Sun , et al. 2021. “Changes in the Gut Microbiome and Metabolome in a Rat Model of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.” Bioengineered 12 : 5173–5183. 10.1080/21655979.2021.1952365 34405758
118 Luo, Lingjie , Haoyang Yin , and Deming Gou . 2023. “Gut Microbiota and Metabolome Changes in Three Pulmonary Hypertension Rat Models.” Microorganisms 11 : 472. 10.3390/microorganisms11020472 36838437
119 Nijiati, Y. , D. Maimaitiyiming , T. Yang , H. Li , and A. Aikemu . 2021. “Research on the Improvement of Oxidative Stress in Rats With High‐Altitude Pulmonary Hypertension Through the Participation of Irbesartan in Regulating Intestinal Flora.” European Review for Medical and Pharmacological Sciences 25 : 4540–4553. 10.26355/eurrev_202107_26247 34286497
120 Chen, Jiyuan , Dansha Zhou , Jinrui Miao , Chenting Zhang , Xiang Li , Huazhuo Feng , Yue Xing , et al. 2022. “Microbiome and Metabolome Dysbiosis of the Gut‐Lung Axis in Pulmonary Hypertension.” Microbiological Research 265 : 127205. 10.1016/j.micres.2022.127205 36202007
121 Dong, Wenxue , Lifeng Ma , Qiumin Huang , Xu Yang , Zhendong Mei , Mengmeng Kong , Zhonghan Sun , et al. 2023. “Gut Microbiome Alterations in Pulmonary Hypertension in Highlanders and Lowlanders.” ERJ Open Research 9 : 00617‐2022. 10.1183/23120541.00617-2022 37377650
122 Chesné, Julie , Richard Danger , Karine Botturi , Martine Reynaud‐Gaubert , Sacha Mussot , Marc Stern , Isabelle Danner‐Boucher , et al. 2014. “Systematic Analysis of Blood Cell Transcriptome in End‐Stage Chronic Respiratory Diseases.” PLoS One 9 : e109291. 10.1371/journal.pone.0109291 25329529
123 Luo, Lingjie , Qinhua Chen , Lei Yang , Zhenxia Zhang , Jihong Xu , and Deming Gou . 2021. “MSCs Therapy Reverse the Gut Microbiota in Hypoxia‐Induced Pulmonary Hypertension Mice.” Frontiers in Physiology 12 : 712139. 10.3389/fphys.2021.712139 34531759
124 Li, Zehua , Zhiye Wu , Jianyun Yan , Hailin Liu , Qicai Liu , Yi Deng , Caiwen Ou , and Minsheng Chen . 2019. “Gut Microbe‐Derived Metabolite Trimethylamine N‐Oxide Induces Cardiac Hypertrophy and Fibrosis.” Laboratory Investigation 99 : 346–357. 10.1038/s41374-018-0091-y 30068915
125 Makrecka‐Kuka, Marina , Kristine Volska , Unigunde Antone , Reinis Vilskersts , Solveiga Grinberga , Dace Bandere , Edgars Liepinsh , and Maija Dambrova . 2017. “Trimethylamine N‐Oxide Impairs Pyruvate and Fatty Acid Oxidation in Cardiac Mitochondria.” Toxicology Letters 267 : 32–38. 10.1016/j.toxlet.2016.12.017 28049038
126 Zhu, Weifei , Jill C. Gregory , Elin Org , Jennifer A. Buffa , Nilaksh Gupta , Zeneng Wang , Lin Li , et al. 2016. “Gut Microbial Metabolite TMAO Enhances Platelet Hyperreactivity and Thrombosis Risk.” Cell 165 : 111–124. 10.1016/j.cell.2016.02.011 26972052
127 Wei, Haoran , Mingming Zhao , Man Huang , Chenze Li , Jianing Gao , Ting Yu , Qi Zhang , et al. 2022. “FMO3‐TMAO Axis Modulates the Clinical Outcome in Chronic Heart‐Failure Patients With Reduced Ejection Fraction: Evidence From an Asian Population.” Frontiers of Medicine 16 : 295–305. 10.1007/s11684-021-0857-2 34159537
128 Chen, Lu , Yong Chen , Mingming Zhao , Lemin Zheng , and Dongsheng Fan . 2020. “Changes in the Concentrations of Trimethylamine N‐Oxide (TMAO) and Its Precursors in Patients With Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.” Scientific Reports 10 : 15198. 10.1038/s41598-020-72184-3 32938991
129 Zeng, Qiang , Mingming Zhao , Fei Wang , Yanping Li , Huimin Li , Jianqiong Zheng , Xianyang Chen , et al. 2022. “Integrating Choline and Specific Intestinal Microbiota to Classify Type 2 Diabetes in Adults: A Machine Learning Based Metagenomics Study.” Frontiers in Endocrinology 13 : 906310. 10.3389/fendo.2022.906310 35832425
130 Yang, Yicheng , Beilan Yang , Xin Li , Lin Xue , Bingyang Liu , Yanru Liang , Zhihui Zhao , et al. 2022. “Higher Circulating Trimethylamine N‐Oxide Levels are Associated With Worse Severity and Prognosis in Pulmonary Hypertension: A Cohort Study.” Respiratory Research 23 : 344. 10.1186/s12931-022-02282-5 36517838
131 Huang, Yuhang , Fanjie Lin , Ruidi Tang , Changlei Bao , Qingxun Zhou , Kaiwen Ye , Yi Shen , et al. 2022. “Gut Microbial Metabolite Trimethylamine N‐Oxide Aggravates Pulmonary Hypertension.” American Journal of Respiratory Cell and Molecular Biology 66 : 452–460. 10.1165/rcmb.2021-0414OC 35100519
132 Videja, Melita , Reinis Vilskersts , Stanislava Korzh , Helena Cirule , Eduards Sevostjanovs , Maija Dambrova , and Marina Makrecka‐Kuka . 2021. “Microbiota‐Derived Metabolite Trimethylamine N‐Oxide Protects Mitochondrial Energy Metabolism and Cardiac Functionality in a Rat Model of Right Ventricle Heart Failure.” Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology 8 : 622741. 10.3389/fcell.2020.622741 33520996
133 Danne, Oliver , and Martin Möckel . 2010. “Choline in Acute Coronary Syndrome: An Emerging Biomarker With Implications for the Integrated Assessment of Plaque Vulnerability.” Expert Review of Molecular Diagnostics 10 : 159–171. 10.1586/erm.10.2 20214535
134 Danne, Oliver , Martin Möckel , Christian Lueders , Clemens Mügge , Gustav A. Zschunke , Hans Lufft , Christian Müller , and Ulrich Frei . 2003. “Prognostic Implications of Elevated Whole Blood Choline Levels in Acute Coronary Syndromes.” The American Journal of Cardiology 91 : 1060–1067. 10.1016/s0002-9149(03)00149-8 12714147
135 Song, Mengmeng , Benjamin P. Xu , Qiongyue Liang , Yaping Wei , Yun Song , Ping Chen , Ziyi Zhou , et al. 2021. “Association of Serum Choline Levels and All‐Cause Mortality Risk in Adults With Hypertension: A Nested Case‐Control Study.” Nutrition & Metabolism 18 : 108. 10.1186/s12986-021-00637-1 34930356
136 Yang, Yicheng , Beilan Yang , Bingyang Liu , Yanru Liang , Qin Luo , Zhihui Zhao , Zhihong Liu , Qixian Zeng , and Changming Xiong . 2023. “Circulating Choline Levels are Associated With Prognoses in Patients With Pulmonary Hypertension: A Cohort Study.” BMC Pulmonary Medicine 23 : 313. 10.1186/s12890-023-02547-9 37689632
137 Morrison, Douglas J. , and Tom Preston . 2016. “Formation of Short Chain Fatty Acids by the Gut Microbiota and Their Impact on Human Metabolism.” Gut Microbes 7 : 189–200. 10.1080/19490976.2015.1134082 26963409
138 Hu, Tongtong , Qingqing Wu , Qi Yao , Kebing Jiang , Jiabin Yu , and Qizhu Tang . 2022. “Short‐Chain Fatty Acid Metabolism and Multiple Effects On Cardiovascular Diseases.” Ageing Research Reviews 81 : 101706. 10.1016/j.arr.2022.101706 35932976
139 Zuo, Kun , Chen Fang , Zheng Liu , Yuan Fu , Ye Liu , Lifeng Liu , Yuxing Wang , et al. 2022. “Commensal Microbe‐Derived SCFA Alleviates Atrial Fibrillation Via GPR43/NLRP3 Signaling.” International Journal of Biological Sciences 18 : 4219–4232. 10.7150/ijbs.70644 35844801
140 Bartolomaeus, Hendrik , András Balogh , Mina Yakoub , Susanne Homann , Lajos Markó , Sascha Höges , Dmitry Tsvetkov , et al. 2019. “Short‐Chain Fatty Acid Propionate Protects From Hypertensive Cardiovascular Damage.” Circulation 139 : 1407–1421. 10.1161/circulationaha.118.036652 30586752
141 Xue, Hongliang , Xu Chen , Chao Yu , Yuqing Deng , Yuan Zhang , Shen Chen , Xuechen Chen , et al. 2022. “Gut Microbially Produced Indole‐3‐Propionic Acid Inhibits Atherosclerosis By Promoting Reverse Cholesterol Transport and Its Deficiency is Causally Related to Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease.” Circulation Research 131 : 404–420. 10.1161/circresaha.122.321253 35893593
142 Haghikia, Arash , Friederike Zimmermann , Paul Schumann , Andrzej Jasina , Johann Roessler , David Schmidt , Philipp Heinze , et al. 2022. “Propionate Attenuates Atherosclerosis by Immune‐Dependent Regulation of Intestinal Cholesterol Metabolism.” European Heart Journal 43 : 518–533. 10.1093/eurheartj/ehab644 34597388
143 Karoor, Vijaya , Derek Strassheim , Timothy Sullivan , Alexander Verin , Nagavedi S. Umapathy , Edward C. Dempsey , Daniel N. Frank , Kurt R. Stenmark , and Evgenia Gerasimovskaya . 2021. “The Short‐Chain Fatty Acid Butyrate Attenuates Pulmonary Vascular Remodeling and Inflammation in Hypoxia‐Induced Pulmonary Hypertension.” International Journal of Molecular Sciences 22 : 9916. 10.3390/ijms22189916 34576081
144 Chen, Yi‐Hang , Wen Yuan , Liu‐Kun Meng , Jiu‐Chang Zhong , and Xiao‐Yan Liu . 2022. “The Role and Mechanism of Gut Microbiota in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension.” Nutrients 14 : 4278. 10.3390/nu14204278 36296961
145 Kim, Sunhong , Jeong‐Hoon Kim , Bi Oh Park , and Young Shin Kwak . 2014. “Perspectives on the Therapeutic Potential of Short‐Chain Fatty Acid Receptors.” BMB Reports 47 : 173–178. 10.5483/bmbrep.2014.47.3.272 24499669
146 Duscha, Alexander , Barbara Gisevius , Sarah Hirschberg , Nissan Yissachar , Gabriele I. Stangl , Eva Dawin , Verian Bader , et al. 2020. “Propionic Acid Shapes the Multiple Sclerosis Disease Course by an Immunomodulatory Mechanism.” Cell 180 : 1067–1080.e16. 10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.035 32160527
147 Tamosiuniene, Rasa , Wen Tian , Gundeep Dhillon , Lijuan Wang , Yon K. Sung , Lajos Gera , Andrew J. Patterson , et al. 2011. “Regulatory T Cells Limit Vascular Endothelial Injury and Prevent Pulmonary Hypertension.” Circulation Research 109 : 867–879. 10.1161/circresaha.110.236927 21868697
148 Xu, Mengda , Zhengyu Jiang , Changli Wang , Na Li , Lulong Bo , Yanping Zha , Jinjun Bian , et al. 2019. “Acetate Attenuates Inflammasome Activation Through GPR43‐Mediated Ca2+‐dependent NLRP3 Ubiquitination.” Experimental & Molecular Medicine 51 : 1–13. 10.1038/s12276-019-0276-5
149 Lindenkamp, Nicole , Marc Schürmann , and Alexander Steinbüchel . 2013. “A Propionate CoA‐Transferase of Ralstonia Eutropha H16 With Broad Substrate Specificity Catalyzing the CoA Thioester Formation of Various Carboxylic Acids.” Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 97 : 7699–7709. 10.1007/s00253-012-4624-9 23250223
150 Pan, Li‐Long , Wenying Niu , Xin Fang , Wenjie Liang , Hongli Li , Wei Chen , Hao Zhang , Madhav Bhatia , and Jia Sun . 2019. “ Clostridium butyricum Strains Suppress Experimental Acute Pancreatitis by Maintaining Intestinal Homeostasis.” Molecular Nutrition & Food Research 63 : e1801419. 10.1002/mnfr.201801419 31034143
151 Li, H. , J. Sun , Jimei Du , Fangyan Wang , R. Fang , C. Yu , J. Xiong , W. Chen , Z. Lu , and J. Liu . 2018. “ Clostridium butyricum Exerts a Neuroprotective Effect in a Mouse Model of Traumatic Brain Injury Via the Gut‐Brain Axis.” Neurogastroenterology & Motility 30 : e13260. 10.1111/nmo.13260 29193450
152 Shang, Haixiao , Jia Sun , and Yong Q. Chen . 2016. “ Clostridium Butyricum CGMCC03131 Modulates Lipid Profile, Insulin Resistance and Colon Homeostasis in Obese Mice.” PLoS One 11 : e0154373. 10.1371/journal.pone.0154373 27123997
153 Hagihara, Mao , Yasutoshi Kuroki , Tadashi Ariyoshi , Seiya Higashi , Kazuo Fukuda , Rieko Yamashita , Asami Matsumoto , et al. 2020. “ Clostridium butyricum Modulates the Microbiome to Protect Intestinal Barrier Function in Mice With Antibiotic‐Induced Dysbiosis.” iScience 23 : 100772. 10.1016/j.isci.2019.100772 31954979
154 Pakhomov, Nikolai V. , Daria S. Kostyunina , Guerrino Macori , Eugene Dillon , Tara Brady , Geetha Sundaramoorthy , Claire Connolly , et al. 2023. “High‐Soluble‐Fiber Diet Attenuates Hypoxia‐Induced Vascular Remodeling and the Development of Hypoxic Pulmonary Hypertension.” Hypertension 80 : 2372–2385. 10.1161/hypertensionaha.123.20914 37851762
155 Zhu, Yijun , Mohammed Dwidar , Ina Nemet , Jennifer A. Buffa , Naseer Sangwan , Xinmin S. Li , James T. Anderson , et al. 2023. “Two Distinct Gut Microbial Pathways Contribute to Meta‐Organismal Production of Phenylacetylglutamine With Links to Cardiovascular Disease.” Cell Host & Microbe 31 : 18–32.e9. 10.1016/j.chom.2022.11.015 36549300
156 Yu, Fang , Xianjing Feng , Xi Li , Yunfang Luo , Minping Wei , Tingting Zhao , and Jian Xia . 2021. “Gut‐Derived Metabolite Phenylacetylglutamine and White Matter Hyperintensities in Patients With Acute Ischemic Stroke.” Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 13 : 675158. 10.3389/fnagi.2021.675158 34393756
157 Yu, Fang , Xi Li , Xianjing Feng , Minping Wei , Yunfang Luo , Tingting Zhao , Bo Xiao , and Jian Xia . 2021. “Phenylacetylglutamine, a Novel Biomarker in Acute Ischemic Stroke.” Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine 8 : 798765. 10.3389/fcvm.2021.798765 35004911
158 Lu, Yuting , Xiangliang Yuan , Miao Wang , Zhihao He , Hongzhong Li , Ji Wang , and Qin Li . 2022. “Gut Microbiota Influence Immunotherapy Responses: Mechanisms and Therapeutic Strategies.” Journal of Hematology Oncology 15 : 47. 10.1186/s13045-022-01273-9 35488243
