
==== Front
Imeta
Imeta
10.1002/(ISSN)2770-596X
IMT2
iMeta
2770-5986
2770-596X
John Wiley and Sons Inc. Hoboken

10.1002/imt2.176
IMT2176
Research Article
Research Articles
Photoaffinity probe‐based antimalarial target identification of artemisinin in the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle of Plasmodium falciparum
PHOTOAFFINITY PROBE‐BASED ANTIMALARIAL TARGET IDENTIFICATION OF ARTEMISININ
GAO et al.
Gao Peng 1 2
Wang Jianyou 3
Qiu Chong 1
Zhang Huimin 4
Wang Chen 1
Zhang Ying 1
Sun Peng 1
Chen Honglin 3
Wong Yin Kwan 1
Chen Jiayun 1
Zhang Junzhe 1
Tang Huan 1
Shi Qiaoli 1
Zhu Yongping 1
Shen Shengnan 1
Han Guang 3 hang@henu.edu.cn

Xu Chengchao 1 2 ccxu@icmm.ac.cn

Dai Lingyun http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9386-5967
2 lingyun.dai@outlook.com

Wang Jigang http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0575-0105
1 2 3 4 jgwang@icmm.ac.cn

1 State Key Laboratory for Quality Ensurance and Sustainable Use of Dao‐di Herbs, Artemisinin Research Center, Institute of Chinese Materia Medical China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences Beijing China
2 Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Shenzhen Institute of Respiratory Diseases, and Shenzhen Clinical Research Centre for Geriatrics Shenzhen People's Hospital; First Affiliated Hospital of Southern University of Science and Technology Shenzhen China
3 State Key Laboratory of Antiviral Drugs, School of Pharmacy Henan University Kaifeng China
4 Shandong Academy of Chinese Medicine Jinan China
* Correspondence Jigang Wang and Chengchao Xu, State Key Laboratory for Quality Ensurance and Sustainable Use of Dao‐di Herbs, Artemisinin Research Center, Institute of Chinese Materia Medical, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
Email: jgwang@icmm.ac.cn and ccxu@icmm.ac.cn
Lingyun Dai, Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Shenzhen Institute of Respiratory Diseases, and Shenzhen Clinical Research Centre for Geriatrics, Shenzhen People's Hospital; First Affiliated Hospital of Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China.
Email: lingyun.dai@outlook.com
Guang Han, State Key Laboratory of Antiviral Drugs, School of Pharmacy, Henan University, Kaifeng, China.
Email: hang@henu.edu.cn

19 2 2024
4 2024
3 2 10.1002/imt2.v3.2 e17622 1 2024
18 12 2023
24 1 2024
© 2024 The Authors. iMeta published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of iMeta Science.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Abstract

Malaria continues to pose a serious global health threat, and artemisinin remains the core drug for global malaria control. However, the situation of malaria resistance has become increasingly severe due to the emergence and spread of artemisinin resistance. In recent years, significant progress has been made in understanding the mechanism of action (MoA) of artemisinin. Prior research on the MoA of artemisinin mainly focused on covalently bound targets that are alkylated by artemisinin‐free radicals. However, less attention has been given to the reversible noncovalent binding targets, and there is a paucity of information regarding artemisinin targets at different life cycle stages of the parasite. In this study, we identified the protein targets of artemisinin at different stages of the parasite's intraerythrocytic developmental cycle using a photoaffinity probe. Our findings demonstrate that artemisinin interacts with parasite proteins in vivo through both covalent and noncovalent modes. Extensive mechanistic studies were then conducted by integrating target validation, phenotypic studies, and untargeted metabolomics. The results suggest that protein synthesis, glycolysis, and oxidative homeostasis are critically involved in the antimalarial activities of artemisinin. In summary, this study provides fresh insights into the mechanisms underlying artemisinin's antimalarial effects and its protein targets.

Here, both the covalent and noncovalent binding targets of artemisinin at different stages of the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle of Plasmodium falciparum were identified using a photoaffinity probe. The results suggest that interfering with the protein synthesis, glycolysis, and oxidative homeostasis pathways of parasites underlies the antimalarial effects of artemisinin. ABPP, activity‐based protein profiling; APP, artemisinin photoaffinity probe; ART, artemisinin; RBC, red blood cell; UV, ultraviolet.

Highlights

We identified the targets of artemisinin at different stages of the intraerythrocytic cycle of Plasmodium falciparum using a photoaffinity probe of artemisinin.

Artemisinin can interact with parasite proteins in vivo through both covalent and noncovalent mechanisms.

Artemisinin may exert its antimalarial effects by interfering with the parasite's protein synthesis, glycolysis, and oxidative homeostasis pathways.

This study provides fresh insights into the mechanisms underlying artemisinin's antimalarial effects and its protein targets.

antimalarial
artemisinin
chemical proteomics
intraerythrocytic cycle
photoaffinity probe
National Key Research and Development Program of China2023YFC3503900 2020YFA0908000 2022YFC2303603 Scientific and Technological Innovation Project of China Academy of Chinese Medical SciencesCI2021B014 CI2023D003 China Postdoctoral Science Foundation2022M721541 China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences (CACMS) Innovation FundCI2021A05101 CI2021A05104 CI2023E002 source-schema-version-number2.0
cover-dateApril 2024
details-of-publishers-convertorConverter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.4.4 mode:remove_FC converted:13.06.2024
Gao, Peng , Jianyou Wang , Chong Qiu , Huimin Zhang , Chen Wang , Ying Zhang , Peng Sun , et al. 2024. “Photoaffinity Probe‐Based Antimalarial Target Identification of Artemisinin in the Intraerythrocytic Developmental Cycle of Plasmodium falciparum .” iMeta 3 , e176. 10.1002/imt2.176

Peng Gao, Jianyou Wang, Chong Qiu, and Huimin Zhang contributed equally to this study.
==== Body
pmcINTRODUCTION

Malaria is a highly virulent and infectious disease that caused more than 619,000 deaths globally in 2021, largely attributed to Plasmodium falciparum (P. falciparum) [1]. P. falciparum has a complicated and extended life cycle that promotes adaptive growth and impedes malaria control [2]. The 48‐h intraerythrocytic developmental cycle (IDC) consists of several key stages for multiplication, including the ring, trophozoite, and schizont stages [3]. These stages are differentiated by its morphological characteristics [4]. Intraerythrocytic parasites, particularly during the trophozoite stage, are the main target of most antimalarial drugs. Artemisinin (ART) constitutes one of the few antimalarial treatments that exhibits effectiveness throughout the asexual IDC of the parasite [5, 6].

Significant progress have been made in controlling the spread of malaria through the promotion of ART and ART‐based combination therapies (ACTs) [7]. Despite ART still being the recommended the first‐line antimalarial drug, there are escalating concerns about the onset of drug resistance to both ART and ACTs in Southeast Asia and Africa [8, 9]. Concurrently, the antimalarial mechanisms of ART have been extensively investigated using various technologies [10, 11, 12]. Our group has mainly utilized the activity‐based protein profiling (ABPP) approach to profile the targets of ART and revealed that the exceptional antimalarial efficacy of ART results from efficient activation of ART by heme and thereby promiscuous targeting of parasite proteins [13]. While we and other groups have identified covalently bound proteins that are alkylated by free radicals of heme‐activated ART [14, 15], it is likely that certain pharmacological effects of ART may not rely on covalent binding [16, 17, 18, 19]. Indeed, our recent work suggests that ART could interact noncovalently with a handful of parasite proteins in vitro [20]. Previous studies have shown that parasites show different sensitivities to ART at different developmental stages (i.e., the ring, trophozoite, and schizont stages) within the IDC, suggesting that the parasite proteins to which ART binds may vary between stages [21, 22]. Furthermore, the heme‐mediated activation mode of ART also suggests that the ART target proteins may differ between different stages of the IDC, as the rate of hemoglobin (Hb) consumption and heme release by parasites varies at different stages [21, 23]. However, previous studies on ART targets seem to have overlooked these aspects. Therefore, a comprehensive identification of ART targets at different intraerythrocytic stages is necessary to further improve our understanding of the antimalarial mechanisms of ART.

In this work, we identified the interacting protein targets (including both covalent and noncovalent binding targets) of ART at the ring, trophozoite, and schizont stages using an ART photoaffinity probe (APP) based on the ABPP technology (Figure 1A). APP has comparable antimalarial efficacy to artesunate (ATS), an ART derivative with much better aqueous solubility. It is also equipped with a diazirine photoactive group and an alkyne reporter moiety that enables covalent crosslinking with the targets upon exposure to 365 nm ultraviolet (UV) irradiation and subsequent click chemistry reaction, which facilitates simultaneous capture of covalent and noncovalent targets. Extensive mechanistic studies were then conducted by integrating target validation, phenotypic studies, and untargeted metabolomics analysis. The results indicate that ART can interact with many parasite proteins in covalent or noncovalent manner, which may collectively contribute to the disruption of parasite's protein synthesis, glycolytic energy supply, and redox homeostasis, ultimately leading to its remarkable antimalarial effects.

Figure 1 In situ fluorescence labeling of photoaffinity APP in Plasmodium falciparum at the ring, trophozoite, and schizont stages. (A) Chemical structures of ART, ATS (an ART derivative with much better aqueous solubility), and APP. (B) Schematic representation of the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle (IDC) of P. falciparum. Merozoites invade red blood cells (RBCs) and undergo the ring, trophozoite, and schizont stages to complete the entire IDC. (C) General workflow of the photoaffinity probe APP‐mediated activity‐based protein profiling used to label and identify ART target proteins in vivo. (D) In situ labeling of APP in P. falciparum at different stages and competition with excess ATS. (E) Confocal imaging showing the distribution of APP (700 nmol/L) in P. falciparum at different stages under ultraviolet irradiation (scale bar = 2 µm). Coo, Coomassie brilliant blue; D, kilo‐Dalton; DAPI, 4′,6‐diamidino‐2‐phenylindole; DIC, differential interference contrast; HZ, hemozoin; LC‐MS/MS, liquid chromatography‐tandem mass spectrometry; nRBC, normal red blood cell; SDS‐PAGE, sodium dodecyl sulfate‐polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; TAMRA, tetramethyl‐6‐carboxyrhodamine.

RESULTS

Fluorescence labeling of APP at different stages of the IDC in P. falciparum

To investigate the antimalarial targets of ART in the IDC of P. falciparum, we first confirmed the comparable antimalarial efficacy of APP to the original ATS (Supporting Information S2: Figure S1) and then carried out in situ fluorescence labeling of unsynchronized parasites using APP with or without UV irradiation. The results showed that protein labeling by APP was dose‐dependent under both conditions and that UV irradiation had little impact on labeling efficiency (Supporting Information S2: Figure S2). Competition experiments further demonstrated the specificity of the probe. However, given the unique heme‐mediated activation mode of ART and the complexity of the parasite life cycle (Figure 1B), we next examined the interactions between APP and parasite proteins at the ring, trophozoite, and schizont stages of the IDC (Figure 1C).

As shown in Figure 1D, the results indicated that APP interacts with parasite proteins at all three different stages, indicating that ART can be activated by heme throughout the IDC. The fluorescence labeling intensity in the trophozoite stage is significantly stronger than that of the ring and schizont stages (Figure 1D), indicating that ART is more activated during the trophozoite stage and can interact with a greater number of parasite proteins [21]. In live cell imaging experiments, we evaluated the distribution of APP at the ring, trophozoite, and schizont stages using a confocal microscope (Figure 1E). The results showed that the probe labeled a wider range of proteins in trophozoite stage parasites, consistent with the fluorescence labeling results in the gel.

In addition, we found that the fluorescence labeling intensity became stronger after UV irradiation for the parasites at the ring and schizont stages (Figure 1D), indicating that in addition to the irreversible covalent binding mode by free radical reactions, ART can also interact with certain proteins in a noncovalent mode or with the same target protein in both two manners. Nevertheless, there was hardly any significant difference in the fluorescence intensity at the trophozoite stage after UV irradiation (Figure 1D). This may be explained by the fact that parasites consume more Hb during the trophozoite stage, resulting in higher heme concentration, so that ART is rapidly activated and alkylates most, if not all, of the target proteins before the photo‐crosslinking reaction occurs. Another explanation is that the protein conformational change induced by the covalent interaction prevents noncovalent binding.

Identification of the APP target proteins at different stages of the IDC

Encouraged by the above in vivo fluorescence labeling results, we then attempted to identify the target proteins of APP in P. falciparum at the ring, trophozoite, and schizont stages using the pull‐down assay with or without UV irradiation. As shown in Figure 1C, parasites at different stages were incubated with APP or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) control, with or without subsequent UV irradiation. Then, the click chemistry reaction was performed to conjugate labeled proteins with a biotin tag, and the target proteins were enriched with streptavidin beads, digested with trypsin, and identified by high‐resolution mass spectrometry (MS). As shown in Figure 2A and Supporting Information S2: Figure S3A, a total of 451 potential target proteins were identified (Supporting Information S1: Table S1), of which 247, 396, and 353 were identified in the ring, trophozoite, and schizont stages of P. falciparum, respectively. Of the 451 targets, 177 were commonly identified in all three stages. The trophozoite stage has the largest number of targets, which may explain why it is the most sensitive stage of the IDC to ART [24]. Analysis of the ratio of abundances of bound proteins clearly shows relatively higher signals for some of the target proteins under UV irradiation than that under non‐UV irradiation during the ring and schizont stages (Figure 2B). However, the effect of UV irradiation on the relative protein abundance was much lower during the trophozoite stage (Figure 2B and Supporting Information S2: Figure S3B). Therefore, the results suggest that in addition to heme activation‐mediated covalent binding to proteins, noncovalent binding of ART to parasite proteins also occur.

Figure 2 Identification and analysis of artemisinin target proteins using artemisinin photoaffinity probe (APP)‐based activity‐based protein profiling. (A) Venn diagram of the target proteins identified by APP at different stages of Plasmodium falciparum. (B) The abundance ratio of target proteins of P. falciparum of different stages identified by APP in situ. (C) Metabolic pathway enrichment analysis for all 451 targets. (D) Gene Ontology enrichment analysis for all 451 targets. Three categories including biological process, molecular function, and cellular component were all included. No‐UV, without UV irradiation; R, ring; S, schizont; T, trophozoite; UV, UV irradiation.

Bioinformatics analysis of the target proteins

Next, we performed Gene Ontology (GO) analysis on these 451 targets, and the results showed that these targets have multiple physiological functions (molecular function analysis) and are involved in diverse biological processes (biological process analysis) at different subcellular localizations (cellular component analysis) within the parasite (Figure 2C). Furthermore, we performed an enrichment analysis of the metabolic processes in which these targets might be involved. As shown in Figure 2D, the results indicated that the targets are mainly involved in several glycolysis‐related metabolic pathways, as well as in the biosynthesis and metabolism of choline, phospholipid, and purine. Protein–protein interaction analysis revealed that the identified targets are mainly involved in multiple processes, such as transcription, protein folding, and catabolism (Supporting Information S2: Figure S4).

We also performed GO enrichment analysis on the target proteins of each of the three stages. This analysis revealed that the targets of the ring stage and trophozoite stage are mainly involved in protein catabolic process, proteolysis, and other processes, while the targets of the schizont stage are mainly involved in processes such as peptide metabolism, amide biosynthesis, translation, and others (Figure 3A–C). In addition, we identified four physiological processes, including translation, proteolysis, peptide metabolic, and biosynthetic processes, that were enriched at all three different stages (Figure 3D). However, the extent of targeting varied among the different stages, with the highest level observed in the ring and trophozoite stage parasites. This suggests that the impact of ART on a particular physiological process fluctuates across stages, likely due to varying activation levels of ART at the ring, trophozoite, and schizont stages, and consequently differences in the covalent and noncovalent binding of target proteins.

Figure 3 Bioinformatics analysis of the identified artemisinin photoaffinity probe target proteins. (A) Biological process (BP) network analysis of the target proteins at ring stage. (B) BP network analysis of the target proteins at trophozoite stage. (C) BP network analysis of the target proteins at schizont stage. (D) The common biological processes enriched at three different stages of the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle. GO, Gene Ontology.

ART interferes with the de novo protein synthesis of parasites

Our target protein analysis indicated that the interference with translation and de novo protein synthesis‐related processes may be essential for the antimalarial effect of ART. During the IDC of P. falciparum, parasites digest up to 95% of host cell Hb and release a lot of amino acids for protein synthesis, accompanied by active translation and proliferation [25, 26]. Therefore, we went on to confirm whether protein synthesis in parasite was inhibited by ATS. l‐azidohomoalanine (AHA), a nonradioactive l‐methionine analog that can be incorporated into proteins during protein synthesis, was used to monitor the impact of ATS on the de novo synthesis of new proteins [27]. The azide part of AHA allows a subsequent click chemistry reaction with a biotin‐alkyne probe, which is then enriched by affinity beads, allowing protein identification by high‐resolution MS after digestion. As shown in Figure 4A, the synthesis of 1421 proteins was significantly inhibited after ATS treatment compared to the control. These proteins are mainly involved in organic substance catabolism, intracellular transport, and other critical physiological processes (Figure 4B).

Figure 4 Artemisinin interferes with the protein synthesis in parasites. (A) Heatmap representation of the parasite proteins with reduced synthesis rate after artesunate (ATS) treatment compared to the control group (dimethyl sulfoxide). (B) Gene Ontology‐biological process enrichment analysis of the proteins with reduced synthesis rate. (C) Fluorescence labeling of recombinant Plasmodium falciparum elongation factor 1‐α (PfEGF1‐α) (PF3D7_1357000) with artemisinin photoaffinity probe (APP) in a dose‐dependent manner. (D) Preincubation with excess ATS (10 μM) and iodoacetamide (10 μM) competes with APP labeling of recombinant proteins. (E) Pull‐down Western blot analysis validation of APP binding to PfEGF1‐α in situ. (F) Validation of ATS to target proteins using the drug affinity responsive target stability method. (G) Representative image of immunofluorescence staining of the co‐localization of APP with PfEGF1‐α proteins under ultraviolet irradiation. (H) Quantitative analysis of the co‐localization ratio of (G). (I) Fluorescence labeling of recombinant PfEGF1‐α with APP under different conditions. Coo, Coomassie brilliant blue; DAPI, 4′,6‐diamidino‐2‐phenylindole; DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; EGF1‐α, elongation factor 1‐α; Flu, fluorescence; NaVc, sodium ascorbate; TAMRA, tetramethyl‐6‐carboxyrhodamine; UV, ultraviolet.

P. falciparum elongation factor 1‐α (PfEGF1‐α, PF3D7_1357000) was identified as a potential target at all three stages of the IDC (Supporting Information S1: Table S1). We then expressed and purified the recombinant PfEGF1‐α protein and verified its interaction with APP. As shown in Figure 4C,D, the labeling of PfEGF1‐α by APP under UV irradiation is dose‐dependent and can be competitively bound by excessive amounts of ATS. In addition, similar competitive binding phenomena were also observed in the in situ pull‐down Western blot analysis assay (Figure 4E). Moreover, the drug affinity responsive target stability (DARTS) analysis showed that the PfEGF1‐α proteins became more resistant to proteolysis after incubation with ATS (Figure 4F), indicating the specific binding of ATS to PfEGF1‐α. The immunofluorescence assay also showed the co‐localization of APP with PfEGF1‐α in situ (Figure 4G,H). In addition, we note that after preincubation with the cysteine (Cys) residue blocker iodoacetamide (IAA), the fluorescence labeling intensity of APP decreased to varying degrees (Figure 4D), indicating that Cys may be at least one of the sites where ATS binds to PfEGF1‐α. We then examined the binding of PfEGF1‐α to ATS under different conditions. As shown in Figure 4I, the fluorescence labeling intensity of PfEGF1‐α under UV irradiation alone is comparable to that under heme and sodium ascorbate alone, indicating that ATS can bind to PfEGF1‐α in both covalent and noncovalent mode.

Furthermore, we examined the alterations in the rate of de novo protein synthesis throughout the IDC of P. falciparum and the impact of ATS on this process. As shown in Supporting Information S2: Figure S5A,B, the rate of protein synthesis fluctuated, with the highest rate in the trophozoite stage and the lowest rate in the ring stage, and ATS impeded this process throughout the IDC [23]. We also analyzed the changes in proteolysis at the ring, trophozoite, and schizont stages. As indicated by the higher protease activity during the trophozoite and schizont stages compared to the ring stage, the degree of protein hydrolysis is elevated after the ring stage. The results also showed that ATS treatment inhibited protease activities to varying degrees (Supporting Information S2: Figure S5C,D). In addition, many ribosomal proteins were also identified as potential targets of ART (Supporting Information S1: Table S1), further supporting that protein synthesis may be affected. In summary, these results indicate that ATS may bind to related parasite proteins, including PfEGF1‐α, throughout the IDC, resulting in the inhibition of protein synthesis and thus antimalarial effects.

ART interferes with glycolysis in P. falciparum

As previously analyzed, metabolic pathways relating to glycolysis and energy metabolism were predominantly enriched in the identified targets, which was expected given that P. falciparum absorbs a significant amount of glucose during the IDC and relies heavily on glycolysis to provide energy for rapid growth and proliferation [28]. This also leads to an increase in the production of pyruvate and lactate [29, 30]. The glycolysis pathway has been identified as an essential pathway for ART to produce antimalarial activity [14, 31]. Therefore, we went on to examine the impact of ART on parasite glycolysis. First, we measured the level of pyruvate in parasites, as well as the level of lactate in both parasites and culture medium. As the drug concentration increased, the levels of pyruvate and lactate decreased significantly (Figure 5A–C). ATP levels showed the same decreasing trend (Figure 5D). We then further evaluated the impact of ATS on the glycolytic activity of intraerythrocytic parasites by measuring the extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) [32, 33]. As shown in Figure 5E,F, the glycolysis process and glycolysis capacity of the parasites were significantly attenuated by ATS in a dose‐dependent manner, consistent with the reduced lactate level.

Figure 5 Artesunate (ATS) inhibits the glycolytic process of Plasmodium falciparum. (A) ATS reduces pyruvate levels in parasites. (B) ATS reduces the levels of lactate in the culture medium in a dose‐dependent manner. (C) ATS reduces the levels of lactate in the parasites in a dose‐dependent manner. (D) ATS reduces ATP levels in parasites. (E) Inhibition of glycolytic activity by ATS was measured using a Seahorse extracellular flux analyzer. (F) ATS inhibits glycolytic activity in P. falciparum in a dose‐dependent manner. All data are averaged from three independent experiments and all values are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM).  2‐DG, 2‐deoxy‐glucose; ATP, adenosine 5′‐triphosphate; ECAR, extracellular acidification rate; nRBC, normal red blood cell. **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.01.

Considering that glycolysis is one of the most fundamental metabolic pathways, some highly active and expressed enzymes related to it are considered as promising targets for antimalarial drugs [34]. In our previous study, P. falciparum l‐lactate dehydrogenase (PfLDH, PF3D7_1324900), triosephosphate isomerase (PfTIM, PF3D7_1439900), and glyceraldehyde‐3‐phosphate dehydrogenase (PfGAPDH, PF3D7_1462800) were identified as potential targets for ART [20], and they were also identified in this work. We first validated their interaction with ATS using DARTS (Supporting Information S2: Figure S6A–C), and then measured the inhibitory effect of ATS on their enzymatic activities, and the results showed that the half‐maximal inhibitory concentrations were at low micromolar concentrations (Supporting Information S2: Figure S6D–F). In addition, we also tried to identify the possible covalent binding sites of ATS to recombinant PfGAPDH using high‐resolution MS. The results indicated that the glutamic acid residue 59 might be a binding site, which was supported by molecular docking simulation (Supporting Information S2: Figure S6G). The above results suggest that ATS may bind to glycolytic enzymes, including PfLDH, PfGAPDH, and PfGAPDH, to inhibit their activities, thereby interfering with the glycolytic process of parasites, and thus exerting antimalarial effects during the IDC.

ART interferes with the redox homeostasis of parasites

During the IDC, parasites consume significant amounts of glucose for energy supply and degrade lots of Hb for growth and proliferation. This metabolic process generates numerous oxidative byproducts, including superoxide anion free radicals (O2˙−) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). This resulting oxidative damage places the parasites in a state of high oxidative stress [35, 36]. Antioxidant activity and oxidative stress pathways were notely enriched in the GO analysis of all targets, as shown in Figure 2D. The parasite's antioxidant defense system mainly comprises glutathione (GSH) and various thioredoxin‐dependent proteins [37]. GSH is the most abundant low‐molecular‐weight redox‐active thiol in parasites, which can neutralize oxidative by‐products such as H2O2, effectively maintaining the intracellular reducing environment [36, 38]. In addition, fluctuations in GSH levels may also affect the drug sensitivity of ART [39]. Here, we simultaneously detected the levels of H2O2 and GSH in parasites. As shown in Figure 6A,B, H2O2 increased significantly after the treatment with increasing ATS, while GSH showed the opposite trend. These results suggest that ATS may cause oxidative damage to parasites by disrupting their redox homeostasis, which is also supported by the changes in malondialdehyde and peroxidase activity in parasites after ATS treatment (Supporting Information S2: Figure S7A,B). In addition, we showed that activated ATS can undergo covalent binding with the thiol group of GSH in vitro (Supporting Information S2: Figure S8). Therefore, ATS may augment oxidative damage in parasites by reducing the levels of redox‐active substances such as GSH.

Figure 6 Determination of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), glutathione (GSH), and validation of the targeting of artesunate (ATS) to Plasmodium falciparum ornithine aminotransferase (PfOAT ) (PF3D7_0608800). (A) ATS increases the level of H2O2 of P. falciparum. (B) ATS decreases the level of GSH of P. falciparum. (C) Schematic diagram of protein S‐glutathionylation. (D) Fluorescence labeling of recombinant PfOAT (PF3D7_1357000) with APP in a dose‐dependent manner. (E) Preincubation with excess ATS (10 μM) and iodoacetamide (IAA) (10 μM) competes with APP labeling of recombinant proteins. (F) Pull‐down Western blot analysis validation of APP binding to PfOAT in situ. (G) Validation of ATS to target proteins using the drug affinity responsive target stability (DARTS) method. (H) Representative image of immunofluorescence staining of the co‐localization of APP with PfOAT proteins under ultraviolet irradiation. (I) Quantitative analysis of the co‐localization ratio of (G). (J) Fluorescence labeling of recombinant PfOAT with APP under different conditions. (K) ATS inhibits the enzymatic activities of recombinant PfOAT in vitro in a dose‐dependent manner with heme activation. (L) ATS inhibits the enzymatic activities of recombinant PfOAT in vitro in a dose‐dependent manner without heme activation. (M) ATS reduces ornithine levels in a dose‐dependent manner. All data are based on at least three independent biological replicates and are presented as the mean ± SEM. a.u., arbitrary unit; conc., concentration; Coo, Coomassie brilliant blue; Flu, fluorescence. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.01.

The protein S‐glutathionylation reaction can affect the function of modified proteins (Figure 6C). A notable example is P. falciparum ornithine aminotransferase (PfOAT, PF3D7_0608800), which directly affects polyamine synthesis by regulating ornithine levels and is involved in the regulation of glucose metabolism and cell proliferation [40, 41]. The active site Cys residues 154 and 163 of PfOAT can be modified by S‐glutathionylation to form disulfide bond, resulting in impaired substrate binding and hence catalytic activity [42]. Here, PfOAT was identified as a potential target in all three stages of the IDC and has been previously identified in other studies [13, 43]. We first validated the specific binding of APP to PfOAT in vitro (Figure 6D–I) and the existence of both binding modes (Figure 6J). Enzyme activity experiments showed that ATS can significantly inhibit its enzyme activity in both heme‐activated and nonactivated states (Figure 6K,L), as well as decrease ornithine levels in parasites (Figure 6M). These results all clearly indicate that covalent and noncovalent binding modes may be jointly involved in the interaction of ATS with PfOAT.

Furthermore, we also validated the interaction of APP with two important peroxidative proteins involved in the maintenance of redox homeostasis in parasites—P. falciparum thioredoxin peroxidase 1 (PfTrx‐Px1, PF3D7_1438900) and 1‐Cys peroxiredoxin (Pf1‐CysPXn, PF3D7_0802200) (Supporting Information S2: Figure S7C) [44, 45], which were also among the identified potential binding targets in this work (Supporting Information S1: Table S1). The results suggest that ATS may also bind to these proteins both covalently and noncovalently, potentially affecting the redox homeostasis of parasites.

ART interferes with the metabolic process of P. falciparum

When parasites are under significant stress and cannot compensate, cascading reactions that affect multiple systems including metabolic pathways occur [46]. Given the considerable inhibitory effect of ATS on the glycolytic pathway of parasites and the interference of ATS with various physiological processes of parasites, we next investigated the impact of ATS on the metabolome of parasites using untargeted metabolomics analysis (Figure 7A).

Figure 7 Untargeted metabolomics analysis of Plasmodium falciparum treated with artesunate (ATS) versus control. (A) Schematic workflow for the untargeted metabolomics study showing sample collection, liquid chromatography‐tandem mass spectrometry identification, and data analysis. (B) Stem plot showing the metabolites with significant differences. (C) The levels of oxidized l‐glutathione after ATS treatment compared with the control group (dimethyl sulfoxide [DMSO]). (D) The levels of oxidized PC (18:5e/2:0) after ATS treatment compared with the control group (DMSO). (E) Metabolites and related proteins involved in enriched metabolic pathways. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM. LC‐MS/MS, liquid chromatography‐tandem mass spectrometry; PC, phosphatidylcholine; RBC, red blood cell; VIP, variable importance in projection.

First, we performed partial least‐squares discriminant analysis to evaluate the metabolic differences between the control group and the ATS‐treated parasites (Supporting Information S2: Figure S9A) [31]. The results showed a notable distinction between the two groups, indicating that ATS caused significant changes in the metabolism of parasites. A total of 818 metabolite characteristics were identified from the untargeted metabolomics map and were used for further analysis. Variable importance in projection (VIP) > 1, p < 0.05, and fold change (FC) > 1.2 were used to screen for significantly altered metabolites, resulting in 42 differentially expressed metabolites (Supporting Information S2: Figure S9B and Supporting Information S1: Table S2). Among them, 30 metabolites were downregulated, whereas 12 were upregulated (Figure 7B and Supporting Information S2: Figure S10). The observed increase in the level of oxidized glutathione was significant (Figure 7C) and consistent with the measurement results in Figure 6B. In addition, a significant reduction in lipid metabolism‐associated products including LPS and phosphatidylcholine was observed (Figure 7D), consistent with the scenario that parasites require large amounts of lipid substances at the intracellular stage to construct new cell membranes to support the growth of newborn parasites [47, 48, 49]. Finally, we mapped the APP target proteins onto the enriched metabolic processes and identified some of the potentially most important target proteins involved in each metabolic process (Figure 7E and Supporting Information S1: Table S3). Due to the haploid nature of Plasmodium and the fact that many parasite proteins are encoded by single‐copy genes [50, 51], it is reasonable to assume that most of the mapped proteins are the key targets related to ATS's impact on parasite metabolism.

In summary, our untargeted metabolomics analyses suggest that ATS can extensively interfere with multiple metabolic pathways of intraerythrocytic parasites, which may directly or indirectly converge on the collective antimalarial effects of ART.

DISCUSSION

ART is the sole frontline antimalarial drug that has yet to develop widespread resistance, and one of the few drugs that is effective against malaria throughout the entire asexual IDC of the parasite. Elucidation of the exact antimalarial mechanisms of ART is urgently needed to optimize current ART drug regimens and address ART resistance, even if there are temporarily mitigatory plans [52]. Research on the antimalarial mechanisms of ART has been progressing slowly, due to the complex life cycle of malaria parasites and the intricate mechanism of action (MoA) of the drug. Currently, most studies focus on the alkylation and covalent interaction impact of activated ART on parasite proteins and the effects of noncovalent binding of ART with parasite proteins in the antimalarial process, and its biological significance remains ambiguous, we feel that other modes of interaction should not be overlooked, therefore in‐depth studies are necessary.

In this work, we comprehensively identified the protein targets of ART at the ring, trophozoite, and schizont stages of the IDC of P. falciparum in situ using an active photoaffinity probe. We investigated the binding mode and conducted a series of validation experiments. ART primarily forms covalent bonds with proteins upon activation by heme, but noncovalent binding events also exist. On the one hand, there are differences in the type and importance of pathways that contribute to antimalarial effects at different life stages of P. falciparum, which may be due to differences in target protein synthesis that align with the stage of parasite growth. On the other hand, there are differences in the modes of binding (covalent and noncovalent binding) to the target protein, which may be due to different levels of heme in different parasite stages, thereby altering the levels of ART activation. Our work provides important experimental evidence for a comprehensive investigation of the covalently and noncovalently bound targets that are potentially related to the antimalarial mechanism of ART. We note, however, that given the rapid activation of ART in parasites, it is unclear how much of the nonactivated form of ATS is reversibly bound and the extent of its inhibition on the target protein function, which still requires further in‐depth study.

We then performed bioinformatic analysis of all the targets and validated several critical proteins/pathways that may be involved in the antimalarial effect. Our results suggest that ART may exert its antimalarial effect by blocking parasite protein synthesis, interfering with the glycolytic energy supply pathway, and disrupting redox‐related processes. We have also performed untargeted metabolomics to investigate the effect of ART on the overall metabolic process in parasites. However, more research is needed to determine the most critical antimalarial targets and pathways and the relationships between them. Finally, since the MoAs of many antimalarial drugs remain largely elusive, our work suggests that combining phenotyping, target identification, and metabolomics is a promising strategy to elucidate these MoAs.

CONCLUSION

Overall, this work presents a wealth of data as a valuable resource for the target identification of ART and provides new insights for the study of the antimalarial mechanism of ART, which is necessary to optimize current antimalarial drug regimens and offer novel solutions to mitigate ART resistance.

METHODS

Parasite culture

Continuous culture of the P. falciparum 3D7 strain was based on the established method with slight modifications [53]. Briefly, parasites were cultured in complete medium supplemented with 2% healthy human erythrocytes and maintained under standard conditions with slight shaking [43]. Parasitemia was evaluated daily using Giemsa‐stained thin blood smears. To prepare highly synchronized parasites at the ring, trophozoite, and schizont stages, parasites were tightly synchronized twice by treatment with 5% sorbitol to obtain ring‐stage parasites, enriched by magnetic separation (MACS CS columns; Miltenyi Biotech) to obtain trophozoite‐stage parasites, and schizont‐stage parasites were isolated by centrifugation over 70% (V/V) Percoll cushions (Novon Scientific) [54].

Fluorescence labeling in vivo of P. falciparum

Fluorescence labeling in vivo was carried out according to our previously described protocol, with minor modifications [43]. Briefly, parasites were cultured in six‐well plates at 5% parasitemia. After incubation with 700 nM APP or an equivalent volume of vehicle (DMSO, final concentration less than 0.1%) for 4 h, the plates were exposed or not to 365 nm UV irradiation for 10 min on ice. For competition, the parasites were pretreated with excess ATS for 1 h, followed by APP for 4 h. After parasite release, the soluble parasite protein was extracted, and equal amounts of protein lysates (20 µg) were used for fluorescence labeling with tetramethyl‐6‐carboxyrhodamine azide (TAMRA‐azide) fluorescent tag (50 μM) through the click chemistry reaction (CuAAC). After the reaction, the proteins were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate‐polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS‐PAGE) electrophoresis.

Target identification through pull‐down assay

The pull‐down assay was performed as previously reported [13]. Briefly, highly synchronized parasites isolated at different life stages were treated with 700 nM APP or an equal volume of DMSO for 4 h. The samples were then irradiated with 365 nm UV for 10 min on ice or not. After irradiation, the soluble parasite proteins were extracted and quantified as described above. Immediately thereafter, CuAAC was performed to conjugate the biotin tag to the proteins with biotin azide. After precipitation and resolubilization, proteins were enriched with NeutrAvidin beads (Thermo Fisher). For target identification, the enriched proteins were reduced and alkylated with dithiothreitol (DTT) and IAA, respectively, and digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. The supernatants were collected, desalted, and dried for subsequent liquid chromatography‐tandem mass spectrometry (LC‐MS/MS) analysis.

For western blot analysis of target validation, the enriched targets were subsequently separated by SDS‐PAGE. Proteins were then transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride membranes, incubated with streptavidin–horseradish peroxidase or appropriate primary and secondary antibodies, and visualized using electrochemiluminescence.

LC‐MS/MS measurement and protein identification

LC‐MS/MS analysis for target identification was performed as previously described [20]. Data acquisition was carried out with Xcalibur (version 4.2.4) in a data‐dependent acquisition mode. All spectra were detected with MS spectra between 300 and 1500m/z at a resolution of 60,000. The acquired spectra were analyzed using Sequest HT against the P. falciparum 3D7 protein database (PlasmoDB‐60, https://plasmodb.org/plasmo/app/downloads/release-60/P.falciparum3D7/fasta/data/). Static and dynamic modifications were set as previously described [20].

Intracellular imaging assay of APP

The imaging assays were performed as described in a previous study [43]. Parasites were treated with APP or DMSO for 30 min, fixed, and dropped onto poly‐d‐lysine‐coated coverslips, and permeabilized. Click reaction with TAMRA‐azide was then performed. Subsequently, the coverslips were transferred to a 4′,6‐diamidino‐2‐phenylindole‐coated slide and imaged using a TCS SP8 SR confocal microscope.

Effect of ATS on de novo protein synthesis of P. falciparum

The AHA labeling was performed to identify ATS‐inhibited de novo proteins. Briefly, unsynchronized parasites were treated with ATS (700 nM) or vehicle control for 6 h culture in l‐methionine‐free medium containing AHA after 30 min depletion of intracellular methionine. Subsequently, parasite‐soluble proteins were extracted, and CuAAC was performed to conjugate the biotin tag to proteins with biotin‐alkyne and enriched by pull‐down assay.

To examine the effect of ATS on the inhibition of de novo protein synthesis, the experiments were performed as previously described and with minor modifications [27, 55]. Briefly, parasites were highly synchronized twice by treatment with 5% sorbitol to ring stage. Infected erythrocytes were washed three times with medium without serum and l‐methionine. Infected erythrocytes were then cultured with l‐methionine‐free culture medium for 30 min to deplete the intracellular methionine reserves. After the depletion, the medium was replaced with l‐methionine‐free medium containing AHA, and incubated with ATS (100 nM) or equal volumes of vehicle control for 5 h. Parasite samples were harvested at every 5 h intervals. Soluble proteins were then extracted for click reaction and separated by SDS‐PAGE for fluorescence scanning.

Drug affinity responsive target stability assay

The drug affinity responsive target stability (DARTS) method was used to detect the binding of ATS to target proteins [56]. Briefly, recombinant proteins (5 μM) were treated with a series of ATS and incubated at room temperature for 2 h. Then, 1 μg/mL of pronase was added and incubated for 10 min at room temperature. After the addition of loading buffer, the reaction was terminated at 95°C, followed by SDS‐PAGE electrophoresis for immunoblotting.

Determination of the proteolysis activity

The protease activity of parasites at the ring, trophozoite, and schizont stages was measured using the fluoro protease assay kit (G‐Biosciences; C006028). Briefly, highly synchronized parasites at different life stages were incubated with ATS (100 nM) for 4 h. Parasites were then collected, released from infected blood cells, and lysed by sonication on ice to extract soluble parasite proteins. After bicinchoninic acid quantification, aliquots of proteins were taken and incubated with protease substrate at 37°C. After the incubation, precipitating agent was added and incubated for another 10 min, followed by centrifugation at 12,000 relative centrifugal force (g) for 5 min. The supernatants were then transferred to new tubes and mixed with detection buffer. The optical density absorbance was measured at 570 nm.

Determination of lactate levels

Parasites were treated with different concentrations of ATS for 4 h. After incubation, the supernatant medium and infected red blood cells were collected. Lactate levels were then determined according to the instructions of the Lactate Content Assay Kit (Solarbio; BC2235).

Determination of pyruvate levels

The pyruvate levels of parasites were determined using the Pyruvate Content Assay Kit (Solarbio; BC2205). In brief, parasites were treated with a serial concentration of ATS for 4 h, then lysed by sonication with the pyruvate extraction buffer and rested for 30 min. After centrifugation at 800g for 10 min at room temperature, the supernatants were collected for further detection of pyruvate levels according to the manufacturer's instructions. The OD absorbance was detected at a wavelength of 520 nm.

Extracellular flux analysis

The ECAR of P. falciparum was measured using the Glycolysis Stress Test Kit on an Agilent Seahorse XFe96 Analyzer. All assays were conducted as previously described and according to the manufacturer's instructions with minor modifications [32, 33]. Briefly, the sensor cartridge was hydrated overnight at 37°C. P. falciparum parasites were incubated with increasing concentrations (0–20 µM) of ATS and released with 0.01% saponin. The parasites were then resuspended in Seahorse XF RPMI‐1640 medium (Agilent Technologies) containing 1 mM glutamine (Agilent Technologies), and seeded into a Seahorse miniplate precoated with 0.01% (w/w) polylysine. Subsequently, other assay media (10 mM glucose, 1 µM oligomycin, and 50 mM 2‐deoxy‐2‐[(7‐nitro‐2,1,3‐benzoxadiazol‐4‐yl) amino]‐d‐glucose) were added sequentially to the corresponding wells, and the plate was loaded into Seahorse XFe96 Analyzer for measurement.

Identification of ATS binding site

As we described previously [20], 10 μM recombinant protein was incubated with 100 μM ATS, 20 μM hemin, and 200 μM sodium ascorbate  for 4 h. Then, the samples were reduced and alkylated with DTT and IAA and digested at 37°C overnight. The peptides were then desalted and dried in a centrifugal vacuum evaporator before LC‐MS/MS analysis as described above.

Molecular docking model

Docking simulation was performed using Molecular Operating Environment (version 2019 0102) with parameters previously described. The chemical structure of ATS was downloaded from PubChem (PubChem ID: 6917864). The protein structure of PfGAPDH (PDB:1T24) was downloaded from the PDB database and prepared using the QuickPrep module.

Detection of H2O2 and glutathione

The hydrogen peroxide assay kit (Beyotime) and the total glutathione assay kit (Beyotime) were used to detect H2O2 and GSH levels in parasites. In brief, parasites were inoculated into 6‐well plates and incubated with different concentrations of ATS (0, 0.5, 1, 5, and 10 μM) in an incubator at 37°C for 4 h. The parasites were released with 0.05% saponin, and the levels of H2O2 and GSH were detected according to the kit instructions.

OAT activity assay

The OAT activity assay was performed as we described previously [43]. Purified PfOAT protein (5 μg) was incubated with different concentrations (0–80 μM) of ART for 1 h, before being transferred to a 96‐well plate. The substrate nicotinamide adnenine dinucleotide and reaction buffer were then added according to the manufacturer's instructions of the assay kit (Solarbio; BC4405), followed by continuous detection of absorbance at 340 nm.

Expression and purification of recombinant proteins

The coding sequences of the target proteins were obtained from the PlasmoDB database (http://PlasmoDB.org). The sequences were synthesized and cloned into the pET‐28a (+) vector by Sangon Biotech. The recombinant proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) and induced by isopropyl‐β‐d‐thiogalactoside. Then, the cell lysates containing recombinant proteins were extracted under a pressure of 1200 bar, loaded onto Ni‐NTA chromatography, and eluted to obtain recombinant proteins.

Fluorescence labeling of recombinant proteins in vitro

The recombinant target proteins were validated as previously described [20]. For the dose‐dependent assay, equal amounts of recombinant proteins (2 μg) were incubated with increasing concentrations of APP for 4 h. For the competition assays, recombinant proteins were pretreated with excess ATS or IAA for 2 h before incubation with APP for another 2 h. Then, CuAAC was performed with TAMRA‐azide. The other steps were the same as those described above.

Sample preparation for metabolite profiling

The P. falciparum 3D7 strain (unsynchronized) was cultured as described above, diluted to 10% parasitemia at 2% hematocrit, and then incubated with ATS (700 nM) and equal volumes of vehicle control (0.1% DMSO) for 6 h under standard conditions. Parasites were then collected and released from the erythrocytes. Then, parasites were immediately dropped into liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C for further metabolite profiling within 2 days.

Untargeted metabolomics analysis using UHPLC‐MS/MS and data processing

Metabolite extraction of parasites (2 × 108 cells/per sample) was performed as previously described [57]. Samples were injected into a Hypersil Gold column. The eluents were 0.1% formic acid (A) and methanol (B) (positive polarity mode) and 5 mM ammonium acetate (pH 9.0) (A) and methanol (B) (negative polarity mode). All experiments were repeated independently at least three times. Raw data generated by ultra‐high performance liquid‐chromatography tandem MS were processed using Compound Discoverer 3.1 (Thermo Fisher). Peak intensities were normalized to the total spectral intensity and matched against the mzCloud (https://www.mzcloud.org/), mzVault, and MassList databases. p value < 0.05, FC > 1.2 or FC < 0.833, and VIP > 1 were set as the significance thresholds to screen for differential metabolites.

Statistical analysis

GraphPad Prism 8.3 was used for statistical analysis. All data are based on at least three independent biological replicates and are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean. Statistical significances were analyzed by one‐way analysis of variance, and a p value of less than 0.05 was considered significant difference.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Jigang Wang, Lingyun Dai, Chengchao Xu, and Guang Han conceived the project and designed the experiments. Peng Gao, Jianyou Wang, and Honglin Chen performed the major experiments. Peng Gao, Chen Wang, and Jiayun Chen performed bioinformatic analysis and data visualization. Huimin Zhang, Yongping Zhu, and Shengnan Shen contributed to data interpretation. Chong Qiu and Junzhe Zhang performed mass spectrometry data acquisition. Ying Zhang, Peng Sun, Yin Kwan Wong, Qiaoli Shi, and Huan Tang assisted in other experiments and provided important suggestions. All authors contributed to manuscript revision and approved it for submission.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Supporting information

Figure S1: Determination of the antimalarial activity of APP and artesunate (ATS) on P. falciparum 3D7 strain.

Figure S2: In situ labeling of APP in live parasites in infected red blood cells.

Figure S3: Identification of the target proteins of artemisinin by APP through ABPP.

Figure S4: Protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks for all the 451 target proteins identified by APP‐based ABPP.

Figure S5: The rate of translation, peptide biosynthesis, and proteolysis processes throughout the entire IDC of P. falciparum.

Figure S6: Validations of the binding of ATS to target proteins including PfTIM, PfGAPDH, and PfLDH.

Figure S7: Determination of redox homeostasis‐related indicators in P. falciparum after ATS treatment and the validation of ATS targeting to Pf1‐CysPxn and PfTrx‐Px1.

Figure S8: Validations of the binding of ATS to glutathione GSH.

Figure S9: Partial least‐squares discriminant analysis (PLS‐DA) and metabolites differential analysis of P. falciparum treated with ATS versus control.

Figure S10: Z‐score analysis of the top 30 differential metabolites with significant differences ranked by p value.

Table S1: All target proteins identified by APP‐based ABPP in P. falciparum at three different stages of IDC.

Table S2: Metabolites of P. falciparum with significant differences after treatment with ATS versus DMSO.

Table S3: Metabolites and related proteins involved in enriched metabolic pathways.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The work was supported by grants from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2023YFC3503900, 2020YFA0908000, and 2022YFC2303603); the Scientific and Technological Innovation Project of China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences (CI2023D003 and CI2021B014); the China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences (CACMS) Innovation Fund (CI2023E002, CI2021A05104, and CI2021A05101); the Innovation Team and Talents Cultivation Program of National Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine (ZYYCXTD‐C‐202002); the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82141001, 82274182, 82074098, 82304577, and 82003814); the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2022M721541); the Excellent Scientific and Technological Innovation Training Program of Shenzhen (RCYX20210706092040048); Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Commission (JCYJ20210324115800001 and JCYJ20210324114014039); Introduce innovative team projects of Jinan (202228029); the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Public Welfare Research Institutes (ZZ14‐YQ‐050, ZZ14‐YQ‐051, ZZ14‐YQ‐052, ZZ14‐ND‐010, ZZ15‐ND‐10, ZZ14‐FL‐002, ZZ14‐YQ‐059, ZZ16‐ND‐10‐23, and ZZ15‐YQ‐063); the Shenzhen Medical Research Fund of Shenzhen Medical Academy of Research and Translation (B2302051); the Distinguished Expert Project of Sichuan Province Tianfu Scholar (CW202002).

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

Research data are not shared. The data supporting this work this paper have been deposited in the OMIX, China National Center for Bioinformation/Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/omix/preview/2DszKpI6). The data and scripts used are saved in GitHub https://github.com/LabWang307/Antimalarial_Mechanism_ART. Supplementary materials (figures, tables, scripts, graphical abstract, slides, videos, Chinese translated version and update materials) may be found in the online DOI or iMeta Science http://www.imeta.science/.
==== Refs
REFERENCES

1 World Health Organization . 2022. World Malaria Report. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240064898
2 Cowman, Alan F. , Julie Healer , Danushka Marapana , and Kevin Marsh . 2016. “Malaria: Biology and Disease.” Cell 167 : 610–624. 10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.055 27768886
3 Milner Jr., Danny A. 2018. “Malaria Pathogenesis.” Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine 8 : a025569. 10.1101/cshperspect.a025569 28533315
4 Phillips, Margaret A. , Jeremy N. Burrows , Christine Manyando , Rob Hooft van Huijsduijnen , Wesley C. Van Voorhis , and Timothy N. C. Wells . 2017. “Malaria.” Nature Reviews Disease Primers 3 : 17050. 10.1038/nrdp.2017.50
5 Tilley, Leann , Judith Straimer , Nina F. Gnädig , Stuart A. Ralph , and David A. Fidock . 2016. “Artemisinin Action and Resistance in Plasmodium falciparum .” Trends in Parasitology 32 : 682–696. 10.1016/j.pt.2016.05.010 27289273
6 Krishna, Sanjeev , Anne‐Catrin Uhlemann , and Richard K. Haynes . 2004. “Artemisinins: Mechanisms of Action and Potential for Resistance.” Drug Resistance Updates 7 : 233–244. 10.1016/j.drup.2004.07.001 15533761
7 Talman, Arthur M. , Jérôme Clain , Romain Duval , Robert Ménard , and Frédéric Ariey . 2019. “Artemisinin Bioactivity and Resistance in Malaria Parasites.” Trends in Parasitology 35 : 953–963. 10.1016/j.pt.2019.09.005 31699532
8 Ashley, Elizabeth A. , Mehul Dhorda , Rick M. Fairhurst , Chanaki Amaratunga , Parath Lim , Seila Suon , Sokunthea Sreng , et al. 2014. “Spread of Artemisinin Resistance in Plasmodium falciparum Malaria.” New England Journal of Medicine 371 : 411–423. 10.1056/NEJMoa1314981 25075834
9 Noedl, Harald , Youry Se , Kurt Schaecher , Bryan L. Smith , Duong Socheat , and Mark M. Fukuda . 2008. “Evidence of Artemisinin‐Resistant Malaria in Western Cambodia.” New England Journal of Medicine 359 : 2619–2620. 10.1056/NEJMc0805011 19064625
10 Zhou, Min , Ayşegül Varol , and Thomas Efferth . 2021. “Multi‐Omics Approaches to Improve Malaria Therapy.” Pharmacological Research 167 : 105570. 10.1016/j.phrs.2021.105570 33766628
11 Yang, Jing , Yingke He , Yinbao Li , Xing Zhang , Yin‐Kwan Wong , Shengnan Shen , Tianyu Zhong , Jianbin Zhang , Qian Liu , and Jigang Wang . 2020. “Advances in the Research on the Targets of Anti‐Malaria Actions of Artemisinin.” Pharmacology & Therapeutics 216 : 107697. 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2020.107697 33035577
12 Benns, Henry J. , Edward W. Tate , and Matthew A. Child . 2019. “Activity‐Based Protein Profiling for the Study of Parasite Biology.” Current Topics in Microbiology Immunology 420 : 155–174. 10.1007/82_2018_123 30105424
13 Wang, Jigang , Chong‐Jing Zhang , Wan Ni Chia , Cheryl C. Y. Loh , Zhengjun Li , Yew Mun Lee , Yingke He , et al. 2015. “Haem‐Activated Promiscuous Targeting of Artemisinin in Plasmodium falciparum .” Nature Communications 6 : 10111. 10.1038/ncomms10111
14 Ismail, Hanafy M. , Victoria Barton , Matthew Phanchana , Sitthivut Charoensutthivarakul , Michael H. L. Wong , Janet Hemingway , Giancarlo A. Biagini , Paul M. O'Neill , and Stephen A. Ward . 2016. “Artemisinin Activity‐Based Probes Identify Multiple Molecular Targets within the Asexual Stage of the Malaria Parasites Plasmodium falciparum 3D7.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 113 : 2080–2085. 10.1073/pnas.1600459113 26858419
15 Ismail, Hanafy M. , Victoria E. Barton , Matthew Panchana , Sitthivut Charoensutthivarakul , Giancarlo A. Biagini , Stephen A. Ward , and Paul M. O'Neill . 2016. “A Click Chemistry‐Based Proteomic Approach Reveals that 1,2,4‐Trioxolane and Artemisinin Antimalarials Share a Common Protein Alkylation Profile.” Angewandte Chemie International Edition 55 : 6401–6405. 10.1002/anie.201512062 27089538
16 Gotsbacher, Michael P. , Sung Min Cho , Nam Hee Kim , Fei Liu , Ho Jeong Kwon , and Peter Karuso . 2019. “Reverse Chemical Proteomics Identifies an Unanticipated Human Target of the Antimalarial Artesunate.” ACS Chemical Biology 14 : 636–643. 10.1021/acschembio.8b01004 30840434
17 Li, Jin , Tamara Casteels , Thomas Frogne , Camilla Ingvorsen , Christian Honoré , Monica Courtney , Kilian V. M. Huber , et al. 2017. “Artemisinins Target GABAA Receptor Signaling and Impair α Cell Identity.” Cell 168 : 86–100.e15. 10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.010 27916275
18 Slavkovic, Sladjana , Aron A. Shoara , Zachary R. Churcher , Elise Daems , Karolien de Wael , Frank Sobott , and Philip E. Johnson . 2022. “DNA Binding by the Antimalarial Compound Artemisinin.” Scientific Reports 12 : 133. 10.1038/s41598-021-03958-6 34997002
19 Du, Yawei , Chao Li , Yu Zhang , Wei Xiong , Fei Wang , Juan Wang , Yingze Zhang , et al. 2022. “In Situ‐Activated Phospholipid‐Mimic Artemisinin Prodrug Via Injectable Hydrogel Nano/Microsphere for Rheumatoid Arthritis Therapy.” Research 2022 : 0003. 10.34133/research.0003
20 Gao, Peng , Jiayun Chen , Peng Sun , Jianyou Wang , Huan Tang , Fei Xia , Liwei Gu , et al. 2023. “Chemical Proteomic Profiling with Photoaffinity Labeling Strategy Identifies Antimalarial Targets of Artemisinin.” Chinese Chemical Letters 34 : 108296. 10.1016/j.cclet.2023.108296
21 Klonis, Nectarios , Stanley C. Xie , James M. McCaw , Maria P. Crespo‐Ortiz , Sophie G. Zaloumis , Julie A. Simpson , and Leann Tilley . 2013. “Altered Temporal Response of Malaria Parasites Determines Differential Sensitivity to Artemisinin.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110 : 5157–5162. 10.1073/pnas.1217452110 23431146
22 Saralamba, Sompob , Wirichada Pan‐Ngum , Richard J. Maude , Sue J. Lee , Joel Tarning , Niklas Lindegårdh , Kesinee Chotivanich , et al. 2011. “Intrahost Modeling of Artemisinin Resistance in Plasmodium falciparum .” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108 : 397–402. 10.1073/pnas.1006113108 21173254
23 Xie, Stanley C. , Con Dogovski , Eric Hanssen , Francis Chiu , Tuo Yang , Maria P. Crespo , Che Stafford , et al. 2016. “Haemoglobin Degradation Underpins the Sensitivity of Early Ring Stage Plasmodium falciparum to Artemisinins.” Journal of Cell Science 129 : 406–416. 10.1242/jcs.178830 26675237
24 Hott, Amanda , Debora Casandra , Kansas N. Sparks , Lindsay C. Morton , Geocel‐Grace Castanares , Amanda Rutter , and Dennis E. Kyle . 2015. “Artemisinin‐Resistant Plasmodium falciparum Parasites Exhibit Altered Patterns of Development in Infected Erythrocytes.” Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 59 : 3156–3167. 10.1128/AAC.00197-15 25779582
25 Statsyuk, Alexander V. 2022. “Inhibiting Protein Synthesis to Treat Malaria.” Science 376 : 1049–1050. 10.1126/science.abq4457 35653471
26 Sherman, I. W. 1977. “Amino Acid Metabolism and Protein Synthesis in Malarial Parasites.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 55 : 265–276.
27 Wang, Jigang , Jianbin Zhang , Yew Mun Lee , Shukie Ng , Yin Shi , Zi‐Chun Hua , Qingsong Lin , and Han‐Ming Shen . 2017. “Nonradioactive Quantification of Autophagic Protein Degradation with l‐Azidohomoalanine Labeling.” Nature Protocols 12 : 279–288. 10.1038/nprot.2016.160 28079880
28 Mehta, Monika , Haripalsingh M. Sonawat , and Shobhona Sharma . 2005. “Malaria Parasite‐Infected Erythrocytes Inhibit Glucose Utilization in Uninfected Red Cells.” FEBS Letters 579 : 6151–6158. 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.09.088 16246333
29 MacRae, James I. , Matthew Wa Dixon , Megan K. Dearnley , Hwa H. Chua , Jennifer M. Chambers , Shannon Kenny , Iveta Bottova , Leann Tilley , and Malcolm J. McConville . 2013. “Mitochondrial Metabolism of Sexual and Asexual Blood Stages of the Malaria Parasite Plasmodium falciparum .” BMC Biology 11 : 67. 10.1186/1741-7007-11-67 23763941
30 Penna‐Coutinho, Julia , Wilian Augusto Cortopassi , Aline Alves Oliveira , Tanos Celmar Costa França , and Antoniana Ursine Krettli . 2011. “Antimalarial Activity of Potential Inhibitors of Plasmodium falciparum Lactate Dehydrogenase Enzyme Selected by Docking Studies.” PLoS One 6 : e21237. 10.1371/journal.pone.0021237 21779323
31 Yu, Xinyu , Changhong Wang , Yuemeng Zhao , Jianxia Tang , Meng Zhu , Lucien Platon , Richard Culleton , et al. 2023. “Ring‐Stage Growth Arrest: Metabolic Basis of Artemisinin Tolerance in Plasmodium falciparum .” iScience 26 : 105725. 10.1016/j.isci.2022.105725 36579133
32 Sakata‐Kato, Tomoyo , and Dyann F. Wirth . 2016. “A Novel Methodology for Bioenergetic Analysis of Plasmodium falciparum Reveals a Glucose‐Regulated Metabolic Shift and Enables Mode of Action Analyses of Mitochondrial Inhibitors.” ACS Infectious Disease 2 : 903–916. 10.1021/acsinfecdis.6b00101
33 Huang, Jian , Yafei Yuan , Na Zhao , Debing Pu , Qingxuan Tang , Shuo Zhang , Shuchen Luo , et al. 2021. “Orthosteric‐Allosteric Dual Inhibitors of PfHT1 as Selective Antimalarial Agents.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 118 (3 ): e2017749118. 10.1073/pnas.2017749118 33402433
34 van Niekerk, David D. , Gerald P. Penkler , Francois du Toit , and Jacky L. Snoep . 2016. “Targeting Glycolysis in the Malaria Parasite Plasmodium falciparum .” The FEBS Journal 283 : 634–646. 10.1111/febs.13615 26648082
35 Vinkenoog, Rinke , Márcia Aparecida Sperança , Onno van Breemen , Jai Ramesar , Donald H. Williamson , Petra B. Ross‐MacDonald , Alan W. Thomas , Chris J. Janse , Hernando A. del Portillo , and Andrew P. Waters . 1998. “Malaria Parasites Contain Two Identical Copies of an Elongation Factor 1 Alpha Gene.” Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology 94 : 1–12. 10.1016/s0166-6851(98)00035-8 9719506
36 Becker, Katja , Leann Tilley , Jonathan L. Vennerstrom , David Roberts , Stephen Rogerson , and Hagai Ginsburg . 2004. “Oxidative Stress in Malaria Parasite‐Infected Erythrocytes: Host–Parasite Interactions.” International Journal for Parasitology 34 : 163–189. 10.1016/j.ijpara.2003.09.011 15037104
37 Schipper, Susanne , Hanzhi Wu , Cristina M. Furdui , Leslie B. Poole , Claire M. Delahunty , Robin Park , John R. Yates, III, Katja Becker , and Jude M. Przyborski . 2021. “Identification of Sulfenylation Patterns in Trophozoite Stage Plasmodium falciparum Using a Non‐Dimedone Based Probe.” Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology 242 : 111362. 10.1016/j.molbiopara.2021.111362 33513391
38 Müller, Sylke . 2015. “Role and Regulation of Glutathione Metabolism in Plasmodium falciparum .” Molecules 20 : 10511–10534. 10.3390/molecules200610511 26060916
39 Vega‐Rodríguez, Joel , Rebecca Pastrana‐Mena , Keila N. Crespo‐Lladó , José G. Ortiz , Iván Ferrer‐Rodríguez , and Adelfa E. Serrano . 2015. “Implications of Glutathione Levels on the Plasmodium berghei Response to Chloroquine and Artemisinin.” PLoS One 10 : e0128212. 10.1371/journal.pone.0128212 26010448
40 Jortzik, Esther , Karin Fritz‐Wolf , Nicole Sturm , Marieke Hipp , Stefan Rahlfs , and Katja Becker . 2010. “Redox Regulation of Plasmodium falciparum Ornithine δ‐Aminotransferase.” Journal of Molecular Biology 402 : 445–459. 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.07.039 20673832
41 Schmid, Stefanie R. , Patrick Linder , Robert T. Reese , and Harold A. Stanley . 1993. “Characterization of a Putative Ornithine Aminotransferase Gene of Plasmodium falciparum .” Mol Biochem 61 : 311–314. 10.1016/0166-6851(93)90076-a
42 Kehr, Sebastian , Esther Jortzik , Claire Delahunty , John R. Yates, III , Stefan Rahlfs , and Katja Becker . 2011. “Protein S‐Glutathionylation in Malaria Parasites.” Antioxidants & Redox Signaling 15 : 2855–2865. 10.1089/ars.2011.4029 21595565
43 Gao, Peng , Yan‐Qing Liu , Wei Xiao , Fei Xia , Jia‐Yun Chen , Li‐Wei Gu , Fan Yang , et al. 2022. “Identification of Antimalarial Targets of Chloroquine by a Combined Deconvolution Strategy of ABPP and MS‐CETSA.” Military Medical Research 9 : 30. 10.1186/s40779-022-00390-3 35698214
44 Kawazu, Shin‐ichiro , Nozomu Ikenoue , Hitoshi Takemae , Kanako Komaki‐Yasuda , and Shigeyuki Kano . 2005. “Roles of 1‐Cys Peroxiredoxin in Haem Detoxification in the Human Malaria Parasite Plasmodium falciparum .” The FEBS Journal 272 : 1784–1791. 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04611.x 15794764
45 Akerman, Susan E. , and Sylke Müller . 2003. “2‐Cys Peroxiredoxin PfTrx‐Px1 is Involved in the Antioxidant Defence of Plasmodium falciparum .” Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology 130 : 75–81. 10.1016/s0166-6851(03)00161-0 12946843
46 Mamede, Lúcia , Fanta Fall , Matthieu Schoumacher , Allison Ledoux , Pascal De Tullio , Joëlle Quetin‐Leclercq , and Michel Frédérich . 2022. “Recent Metabolomic Developments for Antimalarial Drug Discovery.” Parasitology Research 121 : 3351–3380. 10.1007/s00436-022-07673-7 36194273
47 Yu, Min , T. R. Santha Kumar , Louis J. Nkrumah , Alida Coppi , Silke Retzlaff , Celeste D. Li , Brendan J. Kelly , et al. 2008. “The Fatty Acid Biosynthesis Enzyme FabI Plays a Key Role in the Development of Liver‐Stage Malarial Parasites.” Cell Host & Microbe 4 : 567–578. 10.1016/j.chom.2008.11.001 19064257
48 Asad, Mohd , Yoshiki Yamaryo‐Botté , Mohammad E. Hossain , Vandana Thakur , Shaifali Jain , Gaurav Datta , Cyrille Y. Botté , and Asif Mohmmed . 2021. “An Essential Vesicular‐Trafficking Phospholipase Mediates Neutral Lipid Synthesis and Contributes to Hemozoin Formation in Plasmodium falciparum .” BMC Biology 19 : 159. 10.1186/s12915-021-01042-z 34380472
49 Gulati, Sonia , Eric H. Ekland , Kelly V. Ruggles , Robin B. Chan , Bamini Jayabalasingham , Bowen Zhou , Pierre‐Yves Mantel , et al. 2015. “Profiling the Essential Nature of Lipid Metabolism in Asexual Blood and Gametocyte Stages of Plasmodium falciparum .” Cell Host & Microbe 18 : 371–381. 10.1016/j.chom.2015.08.003 26355219
50 Trevino, Simon G. , Standwell C. Nkhoma , Shalini Nair , Benjamin J. Daniel , Karla Moncada , Stanley Khoswe , Rachel L. Banda , François Nosten , and Ian H. Cheeseman . 2017. “High‐Resolution Single‐Cell Sequencing of Malaria Parasites.” Genome Biology and Evolution 9 : 3373–3383. 10.1093/gbe/evx256 29220419
51 Gafan, Colin , Judith Wilson , Louise C. Berger , and Bradley J. Berger . 2001. “Characterization of the Ornithine Aminotransferase from Plasmodium falciparum .” Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology 118 : 1–10. 10.1016/S0166-6851(01)00357-7 11704268
52 Wang, Jigang , Chengchao Xu , Fu Long Liao , Tingliang Jiang , Sanjeev Krishna , and Youyou Tu . 2019. “A Temporizing Solution to ‘Artemisinin Resistance’” New England Journal of Medicine 380 : 2087–2089. 10.1056/NEJMp1901233 31018065
53 Trager, William , and James B. Jensen . 1976. “Human Malaria Parasites in Continuous Culture.” Science 193 : 673–675. 10.1126/science.781840 781840
54 Ramaprasad, Abhinay , Paul‐Christian Burda , Enrica Calvani , Aaron J. Sait , Susana Alejandra Palma‐Duran , Chrislaine Withers‐Martinez , Fiona Hackett , et al. 2022. “A Choline‐Releasing Glycerophosphodiesterase Essential for Phosphatidylcholine Biosynthesis and Blood Stage Development in the Malaria Parasite.” Elife 11 : e82207. 10.7554/eLife.82207 36576255
55 Ma, Yuanhui , and John R. Yates, III . 2018. “Proteomics and Pulse Azidohomoalanine Labeling of Newly Synthesized Proteins: What are the Potential Applications?” Expert Review of Proteomics 15 : 545–554. 10.1080/14789450.2018.1500902 30005169
56 Lomenick, Brett , Rui Hao , Nao Jonai , Randall M. Chin , Mariam Aghajan , Sarah Warburton , Jianing Wang , et al. 2009. “Target Identification Using Drug Affinity Responsive Target Stability (DARTS).” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106 : 21984–21989. 10.1073/pnas.0910040106 19995983
57 Giannangelo, Carlo , Ghizal Siddiqui , Amanda De Paoli , Bethany M. Anderson , Laura E. Edgington‐Mitchell , Susan A. Charman , and Darren J. Creek . 2020. “System‐Wide Biochemical Analysis Reveals Ozonide Antimalarials Initially Act by Disrupting Plasmodium falciparum Haemoglobin Digestion.” PLoS Pathogens 16 : e1008485. 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008485 32589689
