
==== Front
Imeta
Imeta
10.1002/(ISSN)2770-596X
IMT2
iMeta
2770-5986
2770-596X
John Wiley and Sons Inc. Hoboken

10.1002/imt2.170
IMT2170
Review Article
Review Articles
“Nutrient–fungi–host” tripartite interaction in cancer progression
“NUTRIENT–FUNGI–HOST” TRIPARTITE INTERACTION IN CANCER PROGRESSION
WU et al.
Wu Di 1
Guan Yun‐Xuan 1
Li Chen‐Hao 2
Zheng Quan 1
Yin Zuo‐Jing 1
Wang Hui 1 huiwang@shsmu.edu.cn

Liu Ning‐Ning http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1468-6897
1 Liuningning@shsmu.edu.cn

1 State Key Laboratory of Systems Medicine for Cancer, Center for Single‐Cell Omics, School of Public Health Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine Shanghai China
2 Institute of Computing Technology Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing China
* Correspondence Ning‐Ning Liu and Hui Wang, State Key Laboratory of Systems Medicine for Cancer, Center for Single‐Cell Omics, School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 200025 Shanghai, China.
Email: Liuningning@shsmu.edu.cn and huiwang@shsmu.edu.cn

26 1 2024
4 2024
3 2 10.1002/imt2.v3.2 e17004 1 2024
19 11 2023
05 1 2024
© 2024 The Authors. iMeta published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of iMeta Science.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Abstract

The human microbiome exhibits a profound connection with the cancer development, progression, and therapeutic response, with particular emphasis on its components of the mycobiome, which are still in the early stages of research. In this review, we comprehensively summarize cancer‐related symbiotic and pathogenic fungal genera. The intricate mechanisms through which fungi impact cancer as an integral member of both gut and tissue‐resident microbiomes are further discussed. In addition, we shed light on the pivotal physiological roles of various nutrients, including cholesterol, carbohydrates, proteins and minerals, in facilitating the growth, reproduction, and invasive pathogenesis of the fungi. While our exploration of the interplay between nutrients and cancer, mediated by the mycobiome, is ongoing, the current findings have yet to yield conclusive results. Thus, delving into the relationship between nutrients and fungal pathogenesis in cancer development and progression would provide valuable insights into anticancer therapy and foster precision nutrition and individualized treatments that target fungi from bench to bedside.

Interactions between nutrient and fungi in cancer development and treatment remain under investigation. In this article, we aim to provide insights into the relationships between fungi and various categories of cancer, mediated by diverse nutrient sensing pathways of fungi in response to external environment. Moreover, we highlight the potential application of fungi‐targeted strategies in precision nutrition for both cancer prevention and treatment.

Highlights

Symbiotic and pathogenic fungi are crucial in modulating various processes of cancer.

Dietary nutrients play essential physiological roles in growth, reproduction, and invasive pathogenesis of fungi.

The interactions between nutrients and fungi in cancer development provide valuable insights into the application of fungi‐targeted strategies in precision nutrition for cancer prevention and treatment.

anticancer treatment
cancer
fungi
mycobiome
nutrients
MOST Key R&D Program of China2022YFC2304703 2020YFA0907200 Natural Science Foundation of China32270202 source-schema-version-number2.0
cover-dateApril 2024
details-of-publishers-convertorConverter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.4.4 mode:remove_FC converted:13.06.2024
Wu, Di , Yun‐Xuan Guan , Chen‐Hao Li , Quan Zheng , Zuo‐Jing Yin , Hui Wang , and Ning‐Ning Liu . 2024. “Nutrient–Fungi–Host” Tripartite Interaction in Cancer Progression. iMeta 3 , e170. 10.1002/imt2.170

Di Wu and Yun‐Xuan Guan contributed equally.
==== Body
pmcINTRODUCTION

Cancer, as a leading cause of global mortality, was responsible for approximately 10 million deaths in 2020 [1, 2]. The microbiota, a major component of the human body, is indispensable for maintaining overall health. The role of bacteria in cancer has received growing attention over the past decades. The importance of fungi, another essential taxon of the microbiota, has often been overlooked. Although much larger in size than bacteria, fungi account for only 0.1% of microbial DNA, leading to their underestimation as potential disease‐causing agents [3]. Fungal infections contribute to over 1.5 million fatalities worldwide annually and have a significant impact on the host immune system and microbiota as integral components [4, 5].

Recent studies have shed light on the presence of fungal mycobiome across various cancer types, signaling a shift in cancer microbiome research from the bacteriome to the mycobiome, marking a new era in mycobiome‐driven cancer research [6, 7, 8, 9]. Intriguingly, several studies have moved beyond the compositional correlation between fungi and cancer and have started unraveling the intricate mechanisms driving fungal involvement in pancreatic and lung cancer, thereby transitioning from association to causation in cancer mycobiome research [10, 11, 12]. However, these mechanistic studies are still limited to association between specific fungi and tumor types, which awaits the further investigation of molecular mechanisms underlying fungal‐driven tumorigenesis and targeted therapeutic pathways.

Current research on fungi and tumors has made significant strides, revealing a need for extensive supplementation, particularly in the investigation of tumor‐associated microbiota. Nutrients have been shown to play a crucial role in fungal growth, proliferation, invasion, pathogenesis, as well as the composition and diversity of the mycobiota [13, 14]. For instance, glucose could induce the morphological transition of Candida albicans from yeast to hyphae, enhancing its ability to adapt to environmental stress, thereby facilitating fungal colonization and host invasion [15, 16]. Hence, tumor progression and nutrition are intimately correlated. Adequate nutritional intake reduces susceptibility to tumor development, while excessive intake may have the opposite effect. For example, sufficient folate and calcium intake can lower the risk of colon carcinogenesis, whereas high doses of β‐carotene may increase the risk of lung cancer [17]. However, establishing a causal relationship between nutrients and tumors is challenging, and our understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms by which fungi are regulated by nutrients is still limited. Furthermore, there is a growing interest in exploring the role of mycobiota and precision nutrition in cancer prevention and treatment. In this review, we aim to provide an overview of the connection between mycobiota and specific tumor types, as well as the differential nutrient sensing exhibited by fungi in response to the external environment. We also highlight the application of fungi‐targeted strategies in precision nutrition and cancer prevention (Figure 1).

Figure 1 “Nutrition–fungi–host” tripartite interaction in cancer progression. Mycobiome represents a putative correlation between nutrients and cancer. Both commensal and pathogenic fungi are involved in regulation of oncogenesis progress, through secreting bioactive molecules, modulating host immunity, and cross‐talking with nearby bacteria. ↓, decrease; ↑, increase.

FUNGI AND CANCER

The abundance of various bacterial species in the mucosal microbiota and within the tumors has been extensively studied in relation to different types of cancers over the past decades. However, emerging research has highlighted the significance of fungal strains in the context of cancer. Similar to bacteria, the composition of fungal strains shows variations depending on the tumor site, and the presence of cancer‐specific fungi provides new ideas for tumor‐related detection and diagnosis. These correlations in fungal composition offer a promising starting point for exploring the involvement of fungal commensal in carcinogenesis through intricate mechanisms, which may open up avenues for innovative therapeutic strategies and improved patient outcomes. In this section, we delve into the relationship between fungi and cancer, highlighting key findings and exploring potential mechanisms (Figure 2).

Figure 2 The alteration of mycobiome in abundance across different tumor sites. The composition of fungal mycobiome found to be altered in different body sites (colorectum, pancreas, stomach, liver, head and neck, lung, and breast) that are associated with tumourigenesis, and may serve as potential diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers to promote the study of the complicated mechanistic investigation of fungal involvement in carcinogenesis. ↓, decrease; ↑, increase.

Digestive system cancers

Colorectal cancer (CRC)

Globally, CRC is one of the most common causes of human deaths, and the incidence is rising, with approximately 900,000 deaths each year [18, 19, 20]. Risk factors such as diet, lifestyle, and environment may alter the composition and ecological properties of gut microbiota, which may be involved in the metabolic and immune pathways in colorectal tumorigenesis [21].

Indeed, the role of fungi in CRC is an emerging area of research, and several studies have investigated the alterations in the composition and function of mycobiota in CRC patients [3, 20, 22]. The findings suggest that fungal dysbiosis and changes in the fungal network are critical to the pathogenesis of CRC.

Studies using shotgun metagenomics have revealed specific alterations in the fungal composition in CRC patients compared with healthy controls. These alterations include an enrichment of Basidiomycota/Ascomycota ratio [23], an abundance of Malasseziomycetes, and a depletion of Saccharomycetes and Pneumocystidomycetes. Furthermore, specific fungal species such as Lipomyces starkeyi and Saccharomyces cerevisiae were found to be reduced, while others like Malassezia globosa and Aspergillus flavus were enriched in CRC patients [3].

The characteristic fungal abundance in CRC patients has shown promise as a potential biomarker for CRC diagnosis. Fecal fungal signatures have been identified with high diagnostic accuracy, distinguishing CRC patients from healthy subjects. Multikingdom models that incorporate fungal species have demonstrated improved diagnostic performance compared with single‐kingdom models, emphasizing the value of fungi as biomarkers for CRC diagnosis [20, 22].

Moreover, colon tumors were shown to contain more fungal signals compared with negative controls in the studies of intratumoral mycobiota, with the highest Ascomycota to Basidiomycota ratio of which C. albicans being the most prevalent fungal species [6, 8]. In addition, there were differences in the relative abundance of C. albicans and S. cerevisiae in gastrointestinal tumors, indicating that they might be classified into Candida‐ and Saccharomyces‐associated tumors. Intriguingly, transcriptional downregulation of genes associated with cell and focal adhesion, extracellular matrix receptor interactions, and tumor suppressors was discovered in colon tumors containing C. albicans, which were also inclined to metastasize [6].

Recently, some studies have also found definitive evidence that fungi are responsible for tumorigenesis of CRC. Increased C. albicans in CRC samples can regulate interleukin‐7 (IL‐7) production through HIF‐1‐dependent glycolysis in macrophages, leading to the production of IL‐22 in RORct+ group 3 innate lymphoid cells controlled by transcriptional factor Stat3 and AhR. Particularly, the level of IL‐22 in the tumor tissues was strongly linked with fungal burden [24]. The frequency of myeloid‐derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) in colon cancer tissues has been significantly correlated with the fungal loads, demonstrating the importance of the regulatory axis in human disease [25]. While MDSCs could enhance immune suppression and promote tumor growth [26], adapter protein caspase‐recruitment domain 9 (CARD9) could restrict MDSCs thus preventing colon cancer. Moreover, CARD9 is a signaling protein that activates the nuclear factor kappa B and mitogen‐activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways in macrophages, leading to the production of proinflammatory cytokine cascades [27]. Consequentially, the proinflammatory cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor‐alpha, IL‐1β, and IL‐6 could activate Th1 and Th17 cells, which stimulated phagocyte activation and neutrophil recruitment and in turn lead to chronic inflammation [28]. Additionally, Card9‐deficient macrophages with lower fungicidal activity resulted in elevated fungal loads and variance in the overall makeup of the gut mycobiota, considerably rising in Candida tropicalis, which triggered MDSCs differentiation and activated the function [25]. The SYK‐CARD9 signaling axis could activate fungal‐mediated inflammasomes thereby preventing CRC. On the contrary, the deletion of CARD9 or SYK in myeloid cells inhibited IL‐18 maturation and inflammasome activation, and raised susceptibility to CRC by elevating fungi [29]. Generally, these discoveries advance our knowledge of how commensal mycobiota control host immunity and facilitate carcinogenesis by establishing Candida‐driven interactions (Figure 3).

Figure 3 Illustration of the different mechanisms by which fungi promote the development of colorectal cancer (CRC). Increased abundance of Candida albicans can upregulate the production of IL‐7 and IL‐22 in macrophages and RORct+ ILC3s, respectively. The level of IL‐22 and MDSCs was strongly associated with increased fungal burden. The adapter protein CARD9 could restrict MDSCs and activate the NF‐κB and MAPK pathways in macrophages, leading to the production of proinflammatory cytokine cascades and activation of Th1 and Th17 cells subsequently. Depletion of Card9 in macrophages can result in elevated fungal loads, which trigger MDSCs differentiation and maturation. Furthermore, the SYK‐CARD9 signaling axis could activate fungal‐mediated inflammasomes, thereby preventing CRC progression. CARD9, caspase‐recruitment domain 9; IL‐7, interleukin‐7; ILC3s, group 3 innate lymphoid cells; MAPK, mitogen‐activated protein kinase; MDSCs, myeloid‐derived suppressor cells; NF‐κB, nuclear factor kappa B; SYK, spleen tyrosine kinase; TNF‐α, tumour necrosis factor‐alpha.

Besides, pathogenic fungi could secrete detrimental metabolites such as acetaldehyde from C. albicans and C. tropicalis, and candidalysin from C. albicans, which disrupt the epithelial barrier function and induce cytotoxicity and DNA damage, exerting different levels of carcinogenic effects [30]. Interaction between bacteria and mycobiota is equally, if not more, important in the development of CRC carcinogenesis, which can result in the formation of pathogenic biofilms. C. albicans and bacterial microorganisms including Escherichia coli, Enterococcus faecalis, Streptococcus spp., Staphylococcus aureus, and Staphylococcus epidermidis synergistically promote the formation of biofilms, which protect microorganisms from the host immune system, increase epithelial permeability, and promote local inflammatory responses [31, 32]. Hence, colonic mucosal biofilms may be triggers of CRC and have the potential to create a perfect environment of persistent inflammation for the promotion of colon carcinogenesis [33].

Last but not least, a growing body of evidence suggests that there are important interactions between intestinal stem cells and gut microbiota, which can influence their proliferation, differentiation, reprogramming and transformation into tumor stem cells, finally leading to the progression of CRC. However, these studies have primarily focused on the role of bacteria in abnormal reprogramming of tumor and intestinal stem cells, whereas the involvement of fungi has not been fully explored. Further research is needed to thoroughly reveal the significance of fungi in the development of CRC at the intestinal and tumor stem cell levels.

Overall, the studies conducted thus far have provided valuable insights into the association between mycobiota and CRC, highlighting the potential of fungi as diagnostic biomarkers and their involvement in tumorigenesis and immune responses. Further research in this area will deepen our understanding of the complex interactions between fungi, the gut microbiota, and CRC pathogenesis.

Pancreatic cancer

The global burden of pancreatic cancer has increased sharply over the past few decades and is predicted to remain the main cause of cancer‐related deaths [34]. Nonetheless, the precise contribution of mycobiota to the development of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) has remained elusive. In a cohort from the United States, Aykut et al. found that fungi in PDA tumors were ~3000‐fold abundant compared with normal pancreas in both mice and human studies, and differed obviously from the gut or normal pancreas in α and β diversity, with significant enrichment of Malassezia in particular [11]. Fungal ablation prevents tumors in a slowly progressing model of invasive PDA, whereas repopulation with Malassezia instead of other commensal fungi speeds up tumorigenesis by activating ligation of mannose‐binding lectin (MBL) to drive the complement cascade. MBL, a lectin that recognizes fungal infections and activates the pathway of the complement cascade, is essential for carcinogenesis development [35], while C3aR knockdown in tumor cells or deletion of MBL or C3 in the extra‐tumoral compartment are protective against tumor growth. Meanwhile, oncogenic Kras‐induced inflammation results in fungal dysbiosis, which subsequently activates the MBL‐C3 cascade to promote the proliferation of tumors [11].

Notably, oncogenic Kras G12D also elevates IL‐33 expression in PDA cells, thereby recruiting and activating TH2 and lymphoid cells 2, which in turn can provoke tumor growth through the secretion of protumorigenic cytokines, such as IL‐4, IL‐5, and IL‐13 [10]. Surprisingly, intratumoral fungi like Alternaria alternata can promote IL‐33 secretion from PDA cells, and both M. globosa and A. alternata promote tumor growth simultaneously [10] (Figure 4).

Figure 4 Graphical illustration of multiple processes by which fungi participate in the progression of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cancer. Malassezia can promote carcinogenesis by stimulating the activation of MBL to drive the complement cascade, and oncogenic Kras could activate the MBL‐C3 cascade to enhance the proliferation of the tumor. Intratumoral fungi like Alternaria alternata can promote IL‐33 secretion from PDA cells. Oncogenic Kras G12D also elevates IL‐33 expression, and then recruits and activates TH2 and ILC2 cells. This finally promotes the secretion of protumorigenic cytokines, such as IL‐4, IL‐5, and IL‐13, finally provoking tumor progression. IL, interleukin; ILC2, lymphoid cells 2; MBL, mannose‐binding lectin; PDA, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Gastric cancer (GC)

GC stands as the fourth most common malignant tumor in the world and remains a leading causes of cancer‐related deaths [36, 37]. It has been shown that several host‐related factors, including age, cigarette smoking, genetic susceptibility, environmental factors, and microbial infections, are associated with the development of GC [38]. However, due to the challenge of culturing the commensal microbiota residing in the stomach [39], the relationship between gastric microbiota (such as fungus) besides Helicobacter pylori and GC has not been thoroughly investigated.

GC is associated with gastric fungal dysbiosis characterized by changes in ecology and composition. One fungus that can be used as a biomarker for GC is C. albicans because it was found to be greatly enhanced in GC. In addition to C. albicans, Fusicolla acetilerea, Arcopilus aureus, and Fusicolla aquaeductuum rose in abundance, while Candida glabrata, Aspergillus montevidensis, Saitozyma podzolica, and Penicillium arenicola had significantly lower abundance [40]. Furthermore, by decreasing the abundance and diversity of fungus in the stomach, C. albicans could play a role in the development of GC [40]. Increased Candida has also been found to be associated with an enrichment of genes involved in cytokine interactions, host immunity, and inflammation, including IL1A, IL1B, IL6, IL8, CXCL1, CXCL2, and IL17C [6]. This proinflammatory immunological profile aligns with previous research demonstrating that C. albicans induces infiltration of IL‐1β, neutrophils, and Th17 cells in the gut [41]. Additionally, a high prevalence of Candida DNA was strongly associated with reduced survival, implying that Candida DNA may serve as a prognostic biomarker for gastrointestinal tumors [6]. These results highlight the significance of stomach fungal homeostasis. Further investigation is warranted to elucidate the prospective contribution of fungi, including C. albicans, in gastric carcinogenesis and to determine their utility as noninvasive biomarkers for diagnosing GC.

Liver cancer

Liver cancer, particularly hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), has become the third leading cause of cancer‐related deaths [1]. Compared with the healthy controls, dysbiosis of gut mycobiota were discovered in HCC patients, characterized by reduced alpha diversity and increased abundance of opportunistic fungi, such as Malassezia and Candida. The abundance of C. albicans was also significantly higher in tumor node metastasis stage III‐IV HCC patients compared with stages I–II, while the symbiotic fungus S. cerevisiae showed the opposite trend. Besides, abnormal colonization by these opportunistic pathogenic fungi could lead to metabolic changes and accelerated progression of HCC [42, 43].

In addition, several fungi, including A. flavus and Aspergillus parasiticus, can produce more than 20 different types of aflatoxins. These toxins are widely present in various crops, such as cereals, oilseeds, nuts, and spices, with the liver being their primary target organ [44, 45]. The International Agency for Research on Cancer has identified aflatoxins as carcinogenic (Group 1) and potentially carcinogenic (Group 2B) to humans [46]. Short‐term exposure to high concentrations of aflatoxins can lead to acute hepatitis and even death, while chronic exposure could cause immunosuppression, trophic disturbance, and tumor [47]. Aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) is the most harmful of these toxins and it has been linked to 4.6%–28.2% of HCC cases worldwide [48]. AFB1 epoxidation is known to be a crucial part of the genotoxic process and, consequently, in the progression of cancer. It is primarily metabolized in the liver by CYP450 enzymes and converted to reactive 8,9‐epoxide. This metabolite has a strong affinity for DNA, leading to the formation of adducts that promote DNA mutations and contribute to the development of HCC [44, 49], with the main mutation being a G→T reversal at the original adduct site [50]. Additionally, aflatoxin may also synergize with other risk factors, such as hepatitis B infection, further increasing the risk of HCC [51].

Oral cancer

The oral cavity harbors the second largest microbiota in the human body, known as the oral microbiota [52], where Candida is the most prevalent fungi, followed by Aspergillus, Fusarium, and Cryptococcus [53]. Of note, a dysbiotic mycobiota was found in association with oral squamous‐cell carcinoma, accompanied by an expansion of Candida species of which C. albicans was the most common [54].

Additionally, it has been demonstrated that C. albicans isolated from the oral cavity can produce toxic and carcinogenic acetaldehyde from ethanol, a Group 1 carcinogen that can cause mutations by directly binding to DNA [55, 56]. Acetaldehyde‐producing Candida from high ethanol sources is more common in oral cancer patients, and this upregulation of acetaldehyde metabolism is associated with smoking and alcohol consumption. In addition, Candida can form biofilms and produce hydrolytic enzymes, all of which are risk factors for oral cancer [57, 58].

Certain conditions such as a depressed immune status may lead to the formation of nitrosamines from the precursors of various C. albicans that are capable of nitrosation. These nitrosamines then act on the normal epithelium, resulting in dysplasia and ultimately carcinogenesis. Additionally, several proto‐oncogenes may be activated by nitrosamines alone or in conjunction with other chemical carcinogens, thereby initiating the progression of malignant lesions. While smoking promotes keratinization of the oral mucosa further enhancing C. albicans colonization, tobacco products can also lead to epithelial changes through nitrosation. Thus, the combination of C. albicans and tobacco may enhance the carcinogenic process [59]. However, the mechanism of carcinogenesis by Candida‐produced nitrosamines is not sufficiently precise, and more extensive studies in different cancer models and environments are needed in the future.

Nondigestive system cancers

Lung cancer

Lung cancer remains the top cause of cancer deaths worldwide [1]. In addition to hereditary factors and environmental factors like smoking and air pollution associated with the development of lung cancer [60, 61], recent studies have discovered a relationship between the enrichment of specific species of fungi in lung tumors. The Cancer Genome Atlas cohort found Blastomyces dermitidis/gilchristii was enriched in cancer patients, and notably, a higher abundance of Aspergillus and Agaricomycetes was found in tumors of smokers in the Weizmann cohort compared with lung cancer patients who had never smoked [6, 8]. Notably, Liu et al. have recently identified the importance of intratumor mycobiota, especially Aspergillus sydowii, in facilitating the progression of lung adenocarcinoma. A. sydowii boosts the recruitment and activation of MDSCs which were mediated by IL‐1β secretion via β‐glucan/Dectin‐1/CARD9 pathway. This causes suppression of cytotoxic T lymphocyte cells activities and aggregation of T regulatory cells and PD‐1+ CD8+ T cells subsequently, resulting in cancer development eventually [12]. Even so, the temporal sequence between A. sydowii colonization and carcinogenesis is poorly understood, and it is still unclear how the pathogen enters human lung cancers. Furthermore, it will also be crucial to validate these findings in more extensive and diverse cohorts, and translate them into clinical treatments [62] (Figure 5).

Figure 5 Graphical illustration of the functional role of fungi in the development of lung cancer. Blastomyces, spergillus, and Agaricomycetes were enriched in tumors. Intratumor mycobiome, especially Aspergillus sydowii, could boost the recruitment and activation of MDSCs which was mediated by IL‐1β secretion via β‐glucan/Dectin‐1/CARD9 pathway. This causes suppression of CTL cells activity and aggregation of Tregs and PD‐1+ CD8+ T cells, finally resulting in lung cancer progression. AFB1 is able to cause significant oxidative DNA damage as well as stimulate the migration of lung cancer cells. AFB1, Aflatoxin B1; CARD9, caspase‐recruitment domain 9; CTL, cytotoxic T lymphocyte; IL, interleukin; MDSCs, myeloid‐derived suppressor cells; Tregs, T regulatory cells; ↓, decrease; ↑, increase.

Moreover, AFB1 is a fungus metabolite that can cause cancer when it is inhaled into the lungs through grain dust, hence it is also regarded as a lung cancer carcinogen [63]. In different experimental models, researchers recently have discovered that AFB1 induces the production of DNA‐binding metabolites in lung cytosols that can increase lung susceptibility to AFB1 [64]. AFB1 is also able to cause significant oxidative DNA damage that is associated with the carcinogenicity of AFB1 to the lung, as well as stimulate the migration of lung cancer cells [65, 66]. In addition, cytochrome CYP2A13 was engaged in metabolizing AFB1 to its carcinogenic AFB1‐8,9‐epoxide, which is a key player in inhalation‐related lung cancer [67]. Overall, these findings showed that research has been done on the relationship between lung cancer and AFB1, but the potential significance of Aflatoxin M1 needs to be explored further.

Breast cancer

Female breast cancer is the most common cancer, and one of the top five cancers with the highest mortality rate [1]. It has previously been confirmed that fungus and breast cancer are related. Compared with other tumors, Malassezia was significantly enriched in breast cancer and there was a fungi–bacteria co‐occurrence with Aspergillus and Malassezia as the hub. In addition, an elevated prevalence of M. globosa in tumors was associated with reduced overall survival [6, 8]. It is also interesting to note that each subtype of breast cancer had relatively distinct fungal characteristics. Breast cancers can be categorized according to their surface receptors as endocrine receptor (ER; estrogen or progesterone receptor) positive (BRER), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) positive, triple‐positive (BRTP: estrogen, progesterone, and HER2 receptor negative), and triple‐negative (BRTN) [68]. Banerjee et al. found that only seven fungal families (Aspergillus, Candida, Coccidioides, Cunninghamella, Geotrichum, Pleistophora, and Rhodotorula) were shown to be present in more than one breast cancer subtype. Compared with the BRTN samples, the receptor‐positive cancer samples (BRER and BRTP) revealed more intricate fungal diversity [68]. The authors' subsequent findings were consistent with previous ones in that the BRER samples showed the largest fungal diversity, among which Arthroderma were accountable for the highest average hybridization signal. Whereas the BRTN samples had the lowest diverse fungi and yeasts along with skin fungi made up most of the fungal signals [69]. In a mouse model of breast cancer, an important study demonstrated the impact of fungi on cancer treatment. It was found that intestinal fungi can modulate the antitumor immune responses following radiation therapy. The administration of antifungal antibiotics like fluconazole or 5‐fluorocytosine showed that antifungal treatment, as opposed to antibiotic treatment, enhanced the efficacy of radiation therapy. This was evidenced by delayed mammary tumor growth and increased survival rate in the mice model [70]. The current insufficient research on the contribution and evaluation of fungi to cancer treatment suggested novelty perspectives for future exploration.

The investigation of cancer‐related fungi is still in its early stages, and the field of cancer fungal biomes is rapidly expanding. However, the heterogeneity in research methods and sample populations has imposed certain limitations on these studies. One crucial aspect that requires further investigation is the causal relationship between cancer‐associated fungal features and the development of cancer, as it remains unclear whether these features are a cause or a consequence of cancer processes. Future research in this area holds great promise and will shed more light on the complex interactions between fungi and cancer.

NUTRITIONAL REGULATION OF MYCOBIOME AND CANCER PROGRESSION

Accumulating evidence has suggested that commensal and pathogenic fungi possibly involved in regulation of oncogenesis progress, through secreting bioactive molecules, cross‐talking with nearby bacteria and modulating host immunity. It is recognized that all lifestyles, environmental and genetic variables have a significant impact on mycobiome [71, 72, 73]. Diets significantly influence the intestinal metabolic environment, altering the lifestyle of fungi. Few intratumoral fungi could be affected by the abnormal microenvironment after tumor metabolic reprogramming. In light of diet, mycobiome likely represents a putative correlation between nutrients and cancer, though the data are inconclusive yet (Table 1). Dietary nutrients (i.e., cholesterol, carbohydrates, proteins, and minerals), play crucial physiological roles in growth, reproduction, and invasive pathogenesis of the fungal microbiome: (i) Fungus could sense nutritional alterations specifically in microenvironment and change adaptively. (ii) Consequently, fungi produce distinct metabolic products in response, which may serve as signaling molecules, interacting with bacterial kingdom and neighboring cells. (iii) Fungi also adapt their lifestyle, as seen in transforming from commensal to pathogen. (iv) Fungal resistance against antifungal agents may be manipulated by nutrients. It is warranted to explore the effects of nutrients on fungi and oncogenesis. The key aspects of the research involve: first, uncovering the receptors through which fungi sense nutrients and the signaling pathways they utilize to alter their lifestyle. Second, exploring how fungi metabolize nutrients, secrete secondary metabolites, and influence the surrounding environment.

Table 1 Dietary nutrients modulating fungal composition, colonization and cancer risk.

Diet	Fungal abundance alteration	Fungal phenotype conversion	Cancer risk	
Alcohol intake	Candida↑	The pathogenicity of Candida for ALD↑	Liver cancer risk↑	
Epicoccum, Galactomyces, and Debaryomyces↓		Pan‐cancer risk↑	
Fat and cholesterol	Saccharomyces cerevisiae↓	17‐β‐estradiol can lead to Candidiasis	Liver cancer risk↑	
Basidiomycota↑	
Sugar and starch	Methanobrevibacter, Candida↑	Different glycogen led to different phases of transformation	Cancer risk↑	
Fiber	Prevotella, Candida↑	–	Cancer risk↓	
Protein	Methanobrevibacter, Candida↓	Nitrogen source can affect fungal phase, biofilm formation, and antifungal drug tolerance	Cancer mortality↑	
Minerals	–	“Nutrition tug of war”	–	
Abbreviations: ALD, alcohol‐related liver diseases; ↑, increase; ↓, decrease.

John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Alcohol intake

Around the world, alcoholic beverages are special dietary components, often consumed with food. Alcohol contains seven calories for each gram consumed and can be considered as an obesogenic factor. Epidemiological evidence has proved that alcohol consumption contributes to about 4% of cancer cases globally. Drinking alcohol increases the risk of several types of cancer, including CRC, liver cancer, breast cancer, and so forth [74]. The composition and interaction of bacterial and fungal species could be altered owing to chronic alcohol intake [75]. Ethanol produced by C. albicans induces the production of 5‐methyl‐phenazine‐1‐carboxylic acid in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which exhibits antifungal activity [76]. Previous studies investigated that chronic ethanol intake significantly altered mycobiome community, with a significant overgrowth of Candida [75, 77]. The colonization of C. albicans is associated with various intestinal diseases, such as inflammatory bowel disease [78, 79]. Alcohol increases intestinal C. albicans‐specific Th17 cells, migrating to the liver and promoting liver disease via IL‐17 receptor a signaling in Kupffer cells [80]. Also, chronic alcohol administration generates fungal dysbiosis and Candida overgrowth, leading to fungal β‐glucan translocation. Translocation of β‐glucan induces IL‐1β secretion via the C‐type lectin‐like receptor CLEC7A on Kupffer cells, subsequently contributing to hepatocyte damage and promoting the development of ethanol‐induced liver disease [75]. Likewise, it has been demonstrated that the intestinal microbiota produces endogenous ethanol which is obscured by the first‐pass effect, considered as an etiology of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease [81]. Ethanol and its metabolite acetaldehyde, give rise to alcohol‐mediated carcinogenesis via inflammation, genetic damage and metabolism impairment. Also, C. albicans leads to alcoholic‐associated liver diseases via upgraded specific Th17 cells in response to alcohol [80]. Other putative pathogenesis pathways of fungi in liver diseases may depend on or secreting candidalysin [82, 83] and inducing prostaglandin E2 [84]. In spite of fungal etiology mediated by alcohol in liver disease, the causality in tumorigenesis of primary liver cancer remains unclear, and more insightful research would be of great assistance.

Fat and cholesterol

Dietary cholesterol and fat produce more calories per gram which double the amount of carbohydrates. Epidemiology statistics and preclinical studies both have reported a significant positive correlation between fat and cholesterol intake with the risk of liver cancer [85, 86, 87]. It has been reported that the occurrence of obesity is associated with gut fungi. Candida parapsilosis promotes the accumulation of fat and the development of obesity by producing lipase and converting dietary triglycerides into monoacylglycerols [88]. However, whether fungi, like bacteria, can contribute to carcinogenesis independently of obesity remains unclear. Also dietary fat is potential hazard for metabolic syndromes by altering the microbiome and mycobiome make‐up. It has been revealed that a high‐fat diet could lead to a shift in mycobiota composition in the mice model (i.e., the abundance of S. cerevisiae declined) [14]. Specific cholesterol, such as estrogen, can serve as signaling molecules inducing distinctive phenotypic changes in fungi. Phytoestrogen, an estrogen similarity from legumes, grains, and several veggies, can interfere with steroid biosynthesis [89, 90, 91]. For instance, it has been reported that 17‐β‐estradiol can stimulate the growth and colonization of C. albicans, leading to Candidiasis [92, 93, 94]. Conversely, 17‐β‐estradiol inhibits the development and delays the morphogenesis Paracoccidioides [95]. Thus, dietary fat, cholesterol, and steroid hormone levels may lay a profound effect on mycobiota composition.

Sugar and starch

Sugar and starch (a polysaccharide comprising glucose monomers) are two major types of dietary carbohydrates (DCHO), which were recommended to make up 45%–65% of total daily calories. Overconsumption of sugar fuels the growth of cancer indirectly via excessive caloric intake. Low‐carbohydrates diets were confirmed to modulate the microbiome composition accompanying weight loss [96], whereas carbohydrates restriction may have a potential benefit for tumor prevention. The typical low‐carbohydrate diet can induce weight loss, intensively associated with gut bacterial and fungal covariation [96]. A previous study emphasized that Methanobrevibacter and Candida abundance were positively associated with recent high‐carbohydrates diets, despite bacterial population structure was predominantly with long‐term one [97]. Experiments revealed that different glycogen affects the substrate composition and hypha transformation of C. albicans in vitro [98]. C. albicans sense external glucose concentration changes and activate MAPK or cAMP signaling pathways to promote mycelium formation and induce phenotypic switching [15, 99]. Glucose, fructose, maltose, sucrose, and galactose were able to induce the conversion of C. albicans from the yeast phase to the mycelial phase, whereas lactose, sorbitol, and glycerol were unable [15]. In the mice model, different carbon sources led to differences in mycotoxicity [100]. Overall, mice fed with sugars such as glucose or galactose resulted in less severe fungal infections, while higher mycobacterial loads presented in mice with lactic acid [101]. This holds significance in the context of acute fungal infections: restricting the intake of fructose and sucrose over the short‐term aids in controlling fungal growth. Additionally, given the role of fungi in tumor development, carbohydrate restriction and calorie limitation have a potential role in slowing tumor progression.

Fiber

Fiber also is a complex carbohydrate. In contrast to the “notorious” sugar, dietary fiber consumption was putatively suggested to protect against obesity and help lower cancer risk [102]. Short‐chain fatty acids (SCFAs), fermented from dietary soluble fibers by gut microbiota, can directly activate G‐protein‐coupled receptors, inhibit histone deacetylases, and serve as energy substrates to connect dietary patterns and gut microbiota, thereby improving the intestinal health and inhibiting intestinal cancer development [103]. It was observed that Saccharomycetales spp. had a positive association with bacterial SCFA producers (i.e., Clostridium, Faecalitalea, and Megamonas). Consistently, Saccharomycetales spp. was also positively associated with acetic acid and butyric acid. Nevertheless, more mechanistic work is needed to understand the relationship among gut Saccharomycetales spp., bacteria, SCFAs and health [104].

Protein and nitrogen sources

High‐protein intake was associated with a fourfold increased risk of cancer mortality in people aged 50–65 [105]. However, meta‐analyses have not found evidence of a detrimental effect of high‐protein intake on prostate, ovarian, and colorectal [106, 107, 108]. In spite of that, a high‐protein diet is considered as an essential nutritional support for adjunctive treatment of infectious diseases and cancer. Methanobrevibacter and Candida abundance were negatively associated with high‐protein diet, contrary to the effects of DCHO [97]. Nitrogen anabolism or catabolism is an essential metabolism pathway, consistently plays an important role in protein synthesis of both human and microbiota, including C. albicans and Aspergillus fumigatus. Current studies have shown that nitrogen source can affect the phase transition and biofilm formation of C. albicans [109, 110, 111, 112]. C. albicans utilize the Csh3‐SPS sensing complex (Csh3‐Ptr3‐Ssy5 sensing pathway) to perceive extracellular amino acid levels and regulate the secretion of virulence factors via Stp1 controlled genes, including the major secreted aspartyl protease SAP2 [113]. C. albicans can also facilitate proline metabolism via expressing proline metabolic enzymes to promote the transition from the yeast phase to the hyphal phase when engulfed by macrophages. Inhibition of proline metabolism affects hyphal formation, weakening C. albicans' ability to escape macrophages [112]. Similarly, CpcA, a functional gene in A. fumigatus, is capable of modulating the expression of virulence factors in response to amino acid stress conditions [114].

Minerals

It is reported that deficiencies of necessary vitamins and minerals increase susceptibility to several types of cancer. Whereas high dose vitamin or mineral supplements have not reduced cancer risk in well‐nourished populations and might increase risk [17]. In view of the rarity and necessity of minerals, especially micronutrients, for both host and fungi, the “nutrition tug of war” between them is more intense than macronutrients. Vertebrate hosts have evolved complex metal restriction strategies to prevent fungal protein synthesis and disrupt cellular homeostasis, a process termed “nutritional immunity.” In turn, fungal pathogens have developed adaptive mechanisms to cope with conditions of metal depletion or excess [115, 116]. Minerals, including potassium, calcium, sodium, magnesium, iron, copper, and zinc, play a crucial role in protein structure, enzyme catalyst reactions, signal transduction pathways, and cellular physiological homeostasis in both host and fungi [117, 118, 119, 120, 121]. Moreover, it is first discovered that phosphorus nutrition is another nutrient in the regulation of the target of rapamycin (TOR) signaling pathway [122]. C. albicans sense oxidative‐stress pressure in different microenvironments, exert virulence to invade the host, and resist antifungal drugs through the phosphate transporter receptor Pho84 and the downstream TOR signaling pathway. In particular, homologous protein of Pho84 were not observed in humans, but the Pho84 gene sequence is highly conserved in the fungi [123, 124].

FUNGUS TARGETED PRECISION NUTRITIONAL THERAPIES AGAINST CANCER

Dietary factors, including obesity, alcohol consumption, insufficient fiber, and processed meat, are ranked among the top 10 attributing factors of cancer. In this case, dietary modifications and interventions have gained significant attention in the realm of cancer prevention and treatment. Fasting has been observed to have beneficial effects on tumor incidence, cancer progression, and the reduction of chemotherapy‐related adverse effects [125, 126]. Similarly, prolonged caloric restriction holds promise as a feasible approach with similar advantages [127, 128]. Carbohydrate Restriction (or Ketogenic Diet), Mediterranean diet (containing high concentrations of monounsaturated fatty acids and other potentially beneficial components), Protein restriction, and vegetarianism may provide beneficial effects on cancer risk and outcomes, although further research is needed to draw definitive conclusions [129, 130, 131, 132]. Despite the limited data, dietary interventions can slow the progression of cancer, improve the efficacy of chemotherapy and reduce the risk of later complications. While general dietary support has shown promise, the lack of precision remains a limiting factor. An in‐depth understanding of the interactions between nutrients and fungal pathogenesis will provide better guidance for clinical application.

Reducing the virulence of pathogenic fungi via targeting nutritional sensor‐effector pathway

Among the most well‐known pathogenic fungi, Candida, Malassezia, and Aspergillus species cannot be neglected in tumorigenesis and cancer metastasis. C. albicans, as previously mentioned, have been implicated in promoting cancer progression in oral, gastrointestinal, and CRCs [24, 54]. Malassezia has been associated with poor prognostic outcomes in breast cancer [8], while A. sydowii has been recently linked to disease progression and nonsurviving in patients with lung cancer [12]. In spite of antifungal resistance in the treatment of cancer, hepatic toxicity and drug resistance are two other major challenges. Consequently, the antagonism of fungi through dietary interventions has great potential for tumor control.

First, quorum sensing (QS), a density‐dependent signaling mechanism of microbial cells, governs a variety of essential processes, including pathogenicity, morphogenesis, and filamentation [133]. The discovery of QS in fungi, exemplified by the control of filamentation in the pathogenic polymorphic fungus C. albicans through farnesol, highlights the significance of QS as a potential therapeutic target [134, 135]. Since QS is indirectly involved in the emergence of multiple drug resistance in microbial pathogens, it is necessary to find alternative antimicrobial therapies that target and inhibit QS.

Second, metal receptors have emerged as promising drug targets for novel therapeutics because of the significance of metal uptake mechanisms for microbiota growth in the host environment. Pho84, for instance, can be a specific antifungal drug target. Inhibiting the expression of Pho84 not only demonstrates effective antifungal effects, but also simultaneously enhances the efficacy of antifungal drugs and reduces the virulence of C. albicans [122, 123, 124] (Figure 6).

Figure 6 Potential therapeutic insights into tumor prevention and precision nutritional therapy. (A) Quorum sensing (QS) could play an essential role in dietary intervention against fungal virulence. (B) Blockade of specific metabolic pathways would be an effective way to fight against fungi with minimal side effects. (C) It holds great promise for anticancer therapy by supplementing beneficial metabolites and probiotics, such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces boulardii. EGOC, the EGO complex; Fos, foscarnet; PHO REGULON, a huge regulatory network in bacteria; TORC, target of rapamycin complex 1.

Developing new antitumor therapies through fungal secondary metabolites and prebiotics

Advances in genomics, metabolism and microbiome are improving our understanding of cancer metabolic diversity, leading to noval cancer therapies based on precision nutritional therapy (PNT). With regard to bacteria, adjuvants for cancer treatment such as facal microbiota transplantation, prebiotics, engineered probiotics, and metabolites have been applied in bench [53]. Similarly, it holds great promise for anticancer therapy by supplementing probiotic fungi and downstream metabolites, as well as combating fungi through specific blockades of nutrient metabolism. The exploration of the relationship between nutrients and pathogen–host interaction mechanisms of fungi can provide new ideas for the treatment of cancer.

In addition to pathogenic fungi, certain beneficial fungi like Saccharomyces boulardii have shown potential in attenuating liver injury and protecting against diseases [136, 137]. Nonetheless, it is essential to address side effects associated with their clinical use, particularly in vulnerable populations [138]. Exploring probiotics with precision offers the possibility of individualized treatment and more refined approaches to PNT.

Furthermore, fungal secondary metabolites have always held great promise. The study of fungal secondary metabolites, driven by advances in molecular biology, genomics, and bioinformatics, has entered a new era. Fungi produce secondary metabolites in response to variable environmental stresses, and thus secondary metabolite production is controlled by a complex regulatory network [139].

Recently, metabolism enzymes or bioactive compounds have been synthesized using modified microbes. Researchers employed chassis to express functional genes or gene clusters in a heterogeneous manner to address cancer. To provide more accurate and effective treatment results, scientists produced “smart” bacteria that can detect and react to microenvironmental signals [140, 141]. The application of live mycobiome and engineered strains implies that retaining sensor–receptors and immunogenicity is more conducive to the targeted therapies involving fungal secondary metabolites and prebiotics.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES

An expanding understanding of the connection between the human mycobiome and cancer revealed potential mechanisms and avenues for treatment. Fungi have been found to interact with nutrients, contributing to a complex network that significantly influences host physiology. However, it is important to remember that these aspects are still in their early stages of research and exploration.

To date, investigations have revealed superior predictive accuracy and sensitivity based on bacteria and fungi in gauging cancer prognosis, although the fungal microbiota has received less attention due to its lower diversity and abundance relative to bacteria. The potential for utilizing fungi and nutrients as biomarkers or therapeutic targets in modulating cancer development, progression, and treatment response holds immense promise. Nonetheless, several key questions remain unanswered. First, it is crucial to determine whether the association between fungi and cancer‐related processes is causal or consequential. This would provide valuable insights into the underlying mechanisms. Furthermore, the role of nutrient‐mediated machinery in the fungal flora's influence on carcinogenesis, metastasis, therapeutic effects and drug resistance remains largely unexplored. In this pursuit, more extensive and rigorous validation tests encompassing mycobiome composition and fungal‐bacterial interactions are warranted, necessitating larger‐scale sample sizes and multicenter cohort studies. Additionally, the development and integration of novel technologies and the application of multiomics approaches, such as high‐resolution deep mycobiome sequencing and the combination of single‐cell sequencing with spatial transcriptomics, are imperative for advancing our understanding.

Effective metabolic adaptation to the host microenvironment is crucial for fungal proliferation during infections. As the understanding of the interactions between nutrients and the expression of specific genes deepens, novel cancer therapies rooted in precision nutrition strategies may emerge. Metal receptors and QS molecules have become promising drug targets for the development of innovative therapeutics. Designing dietary regimens tailored for precision therapy against fungal targets has great value for clinical application.

Hence, delving into the intricate relationship between nutrients and the pathogenic mechanisms of fungi can provide novel insights into the mechanistic exploration and treatment of cancer. Although we find ourselves at the dawn of a new era, the research will serve as a foundation for translating individual treatment and PNT from the realm of theory to practical implementation.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Di Wu and Yun‐Xuan Guan wrote the manuscript and drafted the figures. Chen‐Hao Li wrote the manuscript. Quan Zheng revised the manuscript. Zuo‐Jing Yin revised the manuscript. Hui Wang supervised and funded this project. Ning‐Ning Liu wrote, supervised and funded this project. All authors have read the final manuscript and approved it for publication.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by funding from the MOST Key R&D Program of China (2022YFC2304703 and 2020YFA0907200), the Natural Science Foundation of China (32270202), innovative research team of high‐level local universities in Shanghai.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

This paper does not generate any new data. Supporting information materials (graphical abstract, slides, videos, Chinese translated version and update materials) may be found in the online DOI or iMeta Science http://www.imeta.science/.
==== Refs
REFERENCES

1 Sung, Hyuna , Jacques Ferlay , Rebecca L. Siegel , Mathieu Laversanne , Isabelle Soerjomataram , Ahmedin Jemal , and Freddie Bray . 2021. “Global Cancer Statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN Estimates of Incidence and Mortality Worldwide for 36 Cancers in 185 Countries.” CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians 71 : 209–249. 10.3322/caac.21660 33538338
2 Piñeros, Marion , Les Mery , Isabelle Soerjomataram , Freddie Bray , and Eva Steliarova‐Foucher . 2021. “Scaling Up the Surveillance of Childhood Cancer: A Global Roadmap.” JNCI—Journal of the National Cancer Institute 113 : 9–15. 10.1093/jnci/djaa069
3 Coker, Olabisi Oluwabukola , Geicho Nakatsu , Rudin Zhenwei Dai , William Ka Kei Wu , Sunny Hei Wong , Siew Chien Ng , Francis Ka Leung Chan , Joseph Jao Yiu Sung , and Jun Yu . 2019. “Enteric Fungal Microbiota Dysbiosis and Ecological Alterations in Colorectal Cancer.” Gut 68 : 654–662. 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-317178 30472682
4 Brown, Gordon D. , David W. Denning , Neil A. R. Gow , Stuart M. Levitz , Mihai G. Netea , and Theodore C. White . 2012. “Hidden Killers: Human Fungal Infections.” Science Translational Medicine 4 : 165rv113. 10.1126/scitranslmed.3004404
5 Li, Fan , Yunhuan Gao , Wenyue Cheng , Xiaomin Su , and Rongcun Yang . 2023. “Gut Fungal Mycobiome: A Significant Factor of Tumor Occurrence and Development.” Cancer Letters 569 : 216302. 10.1016/j.canlet.2023.216302 37451425
6 Dohlman, Anders B. , Jared Klug , Marissa Mesko , Iris H. Gao , Steven M. Lipkin , Xiling Shen , and Iliyan D. Iliev . 2022. “A Pan‐Cancer Mycobiome Analysis Reveals Fungal Involvement in Gastrointestinal and Lung Tumors.” Cell 185 : 3807–3822.e12. 10.1016/j.cell.2022.09.015 36179671
7 Li, Xin , and Deepak Saxena . 2022. “The Tumor Mycobiome: A Paradigm Shift in Cancer Pathogenesis.” Cell 185 : 3648–3651. 10.1016/j.cell.2022.09.013 36179665
8 Narunsky‐Haziza, Lian , Gregory D. Sepich‐Poore , Ilana Livyatan , Omer Asraf , Cameron Martino , Deborah Nejman , Nancy Gavert , et al. 2022. “Pan‐Cancer Analyses Reveal Cancer‐Type‐Specific Fungal Ecologies and Bacteriome Interactions.” Cell 185 : 3789–3806.e17. 10.1016/j.cell.2022.09.005 36179670
9 Nejman, Deborah , Ilana Livyatan , Garold Fuks , Nancy Gavert , Yaara Zwang , Leore T. Geller , Aviva Rotter‐Maskowitz , et al. 2020. “The Human Tumor Microbiome is Composed of Tumor Type‐Specific Intracellular Bacteria.” Science 368 : 973–980. 10.1126/science.aay9189 32467386
10 Alam, Aftab , Eric Levanduski , Parker Denz , Helena Solleiro Villavicencio , Maulasri Bhatta , Lamees Alhorebi , Yali Zhang , et al. 2022. “Fungal Mycobiome Drives IL‐33 Secretion and Type 2 Immunity in Pancreatic Cancer.” Cancer Cell 40 : 153–167.e11. 10.1016/j.ccell.2022.01.003 35120601
11 Aykut, Berk , Smruti Pushalkar , Ruonan Chen , Qianhao Li , Raquel Abengozar , Jacqueline I. Kim , Sorin A. Shadaloey , et al. 2019. “The Fungal Mycobiome Promotes Pancreatic Oncogenesis via Activation of MBL.” Nature 574 : 264–267. 10.1038/s41586-019-1608-2 31578522
12 Liu, Ning‐Ning , Cheng‐Xiang Yi , Lu‐Qi Wei , Jin‐An Zhou , Tong Jiang , Cong‐Cong Hu , Lu Wang , et al. 2023. “The Intratumor Mycobiome Promotes Lung Cancer Progression via Myeloid‐Derived Suppressor Cells.” Cancer Cell 41 : 1927–1944.e9. 10.1016/j.ccell.2023.08.012 37738973
13 Elaskandrany, Miar , Rohin Patel , Mintoo Patel , George Miller , Deepak Saxena , and Anjana Saxena . 2021. “Fungi, Host Immune Response, and Tumorigenesis.” American Journal of Physiology—Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology 321 : G213–G222. 10.1152/ajpgi.00025.2021 34231392
14 Gupta, Yask , Anna Lara Ernst , Artem Vorobyev , Foteini Beltsiou , Detlef Zillikens , Katja Bieber , Simone Sanna‐Cherchi , et al. 2023. “Impact of Diet and Host Genetics on the Murine Intestinal Mycobiome.” Nature Communications 14 : 834. 10.1038/s41467-023-36479-z
15 Maidan, M. M. , J. M. Thevelein , and P. Van Dijck . 2005. “Carbon Source Induced Yeast‐to‐Hypha Transition in Candida albicans is Dependent on the Presence of Amino Acids and on the G‐Protein‐Coupled Receptor Gpr1.” Biochemical Society Transactions 33 : 291–293. 10.1042/Bst0330291 15667329
16 Rodaki, Alexandra , Iryna M. Bohovych , Brice Enjalbert , Tim Young , Frank C. Odds , Neil A. R. Gow , and Alistair J. P. Brown . 2009. “Glucose Promotes Stress Resistance in the Fungal Pathogen.” Molecular Biology of the Cell 20 : 4845–4855. 10.1091/mbc.E09-01-0002 19759180
17 Alpha‐Tocopherol, Beta Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group 1994. “The Effect of Vitamin E and Beta Carotene on the Incidence of Lung Cancer and Other Cancers in Male Smokers.” New England Journal of Medicine 330 : 1029–1035. 10.1056/NEJM199404143301501 8127329
18 Siegel, Rebecca L. , Nikita Sandeep Wagle , Andrea Cercek , Robert A. Smith , and Ahmedin Jemal . 2023. “Colorectal Cancer Statistics, 2023.” CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians 73 : 233–254. 10.3322/caac.21772 36856579
19 Janney, Alina , Fiona Powrie , and Elizabeth H. Mann . 2020. “Host‐Microbiota Maladaptation in Colorectal Cancer.” Nature 585 : 509–517. 10.1038/s41586-020-2729-3 32968260
20 Liu, Ning‐Ning , Na Jiao , Jing‐Cong Tan , Ziliang Wang , Dingfeng Wu , An‐Jun Wang , Jie Chen , et al. 2022. “Multi‐Kingdom Microbiota Analyses Identify Bacterial–Fungal Interactions and Biomarkers of Colorectal Cancer Across Cohorts.” Nature Microbiology 7 : 238–250. 10.1038/s41564-021-01030-7
21 Song, Mingyang , Andrew T. Chan , and Jun Sun . 2020. “Influence of the Gut Microbiome, Diet, and Environment on Risk of Colorectal Cancer.” Gastroenterology 158 : 322–340. 10.1053/j.gastro.2019.06.048 31586566
22 Lin, Yufeng , Harry Cheuk‐Hay Lau , Yali Liu , Xing Kang , Yiwei Wang , Nick Lung‐Ngai Ting , Thomas Ngai‐Yeung Kwong , et al. 2022. “Altered Mycobiota Signatures and Enriched Pathogenic Aspergillus rambellii are Associated With Colorectal Cancer Based on Multicohort Fecal Metagenomic Analyses.” Gastroenterology 163 : 908–921. 10.1053/j.gastro.2022.06.038 35724733
23 Sokol, Harry , Valentin Leducq , Hugues Aschard , Hang‐Phuong Pham , Sarah Jegou , Cecilia Landman , David Cohen , et al. 2017. “Fungal Microbiota Dysbiosis in IBD.” Gut 66 : 1039–1048. 10.1136/gutjnl-2015-310746 26843508
24 Zhu, Yanan , Tao Shi , Xia Lu , Zhen Xu , Junxing Qu , Zhiyong Zhang , Guoping Shi , et al. 2021. “Fungal‐Induced Glycolysis in Macrophages Promotes Colon Cancer by Enhancing Innate Lymphoid Cell Secretion of IL‐22.” The EMBO Journal 40 : e105320. 10.15252/embj.2020105320 33591591
25 Wang, Tingting , Chaogang Fan , Anran Yao , Xingwei Xu , Guoxing Zheng , Yun You , Changying Jiang , et al. 2018. “The Adaptor Protein CARD9 Protects Against Colon Cancer by Restricting Mycobiota‐Mediated Expansion of Myeloid‐Derived Suppressor Cells.” Immunity 49 : 504–514.e4. 10.1016/j.immuni.2018.08.018 30231984
26 Gabrilovich, Dmitry I. , and Srinivas Nagaraj . 2009. “Myeloid‐Derived Suppressor Cells as Regulators of the Immune System.” Nature Reviews Immunology 9 : 162–174. 10.1038/nri2506
27 Drummond, Rebecca A. , Luis M. Franco , and Michail S. Lionakis . 2018. “Human CARD9: A Critical Molecule of Fungal Immune Surveillance.” Frontiers in Immunology 9 : 1836. 10.3389/fimmu.2018.01836 30127791
28 Bojang, Ebrima , Harlene Ghuman , Pizga Kumwenda , and Rebecca A. Hall . 2021. “Immune Sensing of Candida Albicans .” Journal of Fungi 7 : 119. 10.3390/jof7020119 33562068
29 Malik, Ankit , Deepika Sharma , R. K. Subbarao Malireddi , Clifford S. Guy , Ti‐Cheng Chang , Scott R. Olsen , Geoffrey Neale , Peter Vogel , and Thirumala‐Devi Kanneganti . 2018. “SYK‐CARD9 Signaling Axis Promotes Gut Fungi‐Mediated Inflammasome Activation to Restrict Colitis and Colon Cancer.” Immunity 49 : 515–530.e5. 10.1016/j.immuni.2018.08.024 30231985
30 Vallianou, Natalia , Dimitris Kounatidis , Gerasimos Socrates Christodoulatos , Fotis Panagopoulos , Irene Karampela , and Maria Dalamaga . 2021. “Mycobiome and Cancer: What is the Evidence?” Cancers 13 : 3149. 10.3390/cancers13133149 34202433
31 Qin, Xiali , Yu Gu , Tianyu Liu , Chen Wang , Weilong Zhong , Bangmao Wang , and Hailong Cao . 2021. “Gut Mycobiome: A Promising Target for Colorectal Cancer.” Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)—Reviews on Cancer 1875 : 188489. 10.1016/j.bbcan.2020.188489 33278512
32 Hager, Christopher L. , and Mahmoud A. Ghannoum . 2017. “The Mycobiome: Role in Health and Disease, and as a Potential Probiotic Target in Gastrointestinal Disease.” Digestive and Liver Disease 49 : 1171–1176. 10.1016/j.dld.2017.08.025 28988727
33 Dejea, Christine M. , Payam Fathi , John M. Craig , Annemarie Boleij , Rahwa Taddese , Abby L. Geis , Xinqun Wu , et al. 2018. “Patients With Familial Adenomatous Polyposis Harbor Colonic Biofilms Containing Tumorigenic Bacteria.” Science 359 : 592–597. 10.1126/science.aah3648 29420293
34 Collaborators, GBD 2017 Pancreatic Cancer . 2019. “The Global, Regional, and National Burden of Pancreatic Cancer and Its Attributable Risk Factors in 195 Countries and Territories, 1990–2017: A Systematic Analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017.” Lancet Gastroenterology & Hepatology 4 : 934–947. 10.1016/S2468-1253(19)30347-4 31648972
35 van Asbeck, Eveline C. , Andy I. M. Hoepelman , Jelle Scharringa , Bjorn L. Herpers , and Jan Verhoef . 2008. “Mannose Binding Lectin Plays a Crucial Role in Innate Immunity Against Yeast by Enhanced Complement Activation and Enhanced Uptake of Polymorphonuclear Cells.” BMC Microbiology 8 : 229. 10.1186/1471-2180-8-229 19094203
36 Machlowska, Julita , Jacek Baj , Monika Sitarz , Ryszard Maciejewski , and Robert Sitarz . 2020. “Gastric Cancer: Epidemiology, Risk Factors, Classification, Genomic Characteristics and Treatment Strategies.” International Journal of Molecular Sciences 21 : 4012. 10.3390/ijms21114012 32512697
37 Smyth, Elizabeth C. , Magnus Nilsson , Heike I. Grabsch , Nicole Ct van Grieken , and Florian Lordick . 2020. “Gastric Cancer.” The Lancet 396 : 635–648. 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31288-5
38 Zhang, Rui , He Li , Ni Li , Ju‐Fang Shi , Jiang Li , Hong‐Da Chen , Yi‐Wen Yu , et al. 2021. “Risk Factors for Gastric Cancer: A Large‐Scale, Population‐Based Case‐Control Study.” Chinese Medical Journal 134 : 1952–1958. 10.1097/CM9.0000000000001652 34310399
39 Sheh, Alexander , and James G. Fox . 2013. “The Role of the Gastrointestinal Microbiome in Helicobacter pylori Pathogenesis.” Gut Microbes 4 : 505–531. 10.4161/gmic.26205 23962822
40 Zhong, Mengya , Yubo Xiong , Jiabao Zhao , Zhi Gao , Jingsong Ma , Zhengxin Wu , Yongxi Song , and Xuehui Hong . 2021. “ Candida albicans Disorder is Associated With Gastric Carcinogenesis.” Theranostics 11 : 4945–4956. 10.7150/thno.55209 33754037
41 Li, Xin V. , Irina Leonardi , Gregory G. Putzel , Alexa Semon , William D. Fiers , Takato Kusakabe , Woan‐Yu Lin , et al. 2022. “Immune Regulation by Fungal Strain Diversity in Inflammatory Bowel Disease.” Nature 603 : 672–678. 10.1038/s41586-022-04502-w 35296857
42 Zhang, Lilong , Chen Chen , Dongqi Chai , Chunlei Li , Zhendong Qiu , Tianrui Kuang , Li Liu , Wenhong Deng , and Weixing Wang . 2023. “Characterization of the Intestinal Fungal Microbiome in Patients With Hepatocellular Carcinoma.” Journal of Translational Medicine 21 : 126. 10.1186/s12967-023-03940-y 36793057
43 Liu, Zherui , Yinyin Li , Chen Li , Guanglin Lei , Lin Zhou , Xiangling Chen , Xiaodong Jia , and Yinying Lu . 2022. “Intestinal Candida albicans Promotes Hepatocarcinogenesis by Up‐Regulating NLRP6.” Frontiers in Microbiology 13 : 812771. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.812771 35369462
44 Marchese, Silvia , Andrea Polo , Andrea Ariano , Salvatore Velotto , Susan Costantini , and Lorella Severino . 2018. “Aflatoxin B1 and M1: Biological Properties and Their Involvement in Cancer Development.” Toxins 10 : 214. 10.3390/toxins10060214 29794965
45 Meissonnier, Guylaine M. , Joelle Laffitte , Nicolas Loiseau , Etienne Benoit , Isabelle Raymond , Philippe Pinton , Anne‐Marie Cossalter , Gérard Bertin , Isabelle P. Oswald , and Pierre Galtier . 2007. “Selective Impairment of Drug‐Metabolizing Enzymes in Pig Liver During Subchronic Dietary Exposure to Aflatoxin B1.” Food and Chemical Toxicology 45 : 2145–2154. 10.1016/j.fct.2007.05.012 17614185
46 1993. “Aflatoxins.” IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans 56 : 245–395. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8411624 8411624
47 Rapisarda, Venerando , Carla Loreto , Michele Malaguarnera , Annalisa Ardiri , Maria Proiti , Giuseppe Rigano , Evelise Frazzetto , et al. 2016. “Hepatocellular Carcinoma and the Risk of Occupational Exposure.” World Journal of Hepatology 8 : 573–590. 10.4254/wjh.v8.i13.573 27168870
48 Kucukcakan, Basak , and Zehra Hayrulai‐Musliu . 2015. “Challenging Role of Dietary Aflatoxin B1 Exposure and Hepatitis B Infection on Risk of Hepatocellular Carcinoma.” Open Access Macedonian Journal of Medical Sciences 3 : 363–369. 10.3889/oamjms.2015.032 27275251
49 Nugraha, Ananditya , Khusnul Khotimah , and Ivonne M. C. M. Rietjens . 2018. “Risk Assessment of Aflatoxin B1 Exposure from Maize and Peanut Consumption in Indonesia Using the Margin of Exposure and Liver Cancer Risk Estimation Approaches.” Food and Chemical Toxicology 113 : 134–144. 10.1016/j.fct.2018.01.036 29374592
50 Bailey, E. A. , R. S. Iyer , M. P. Stone , T. M. Harris , and J. M. Essigmann . 1996. “Mutational Properties of the Primary Aflatoxin B1‐DNA Adduct.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93 : 1535–1539. 10.1073/pnas.93.4.1535
51 Liu, Yan , and Felicia Wu . 2010. “Global Burden of Aflatoxin‐Induced Hepatocellular Carcinoma: A Risk Assessment.” Environmental Health Perspectives 118 : 818–824. 10.1289/ehp.0901388 20172840
52 Human Microbiome Project, Consortium . 2012. “Structure, Function and Diversity of the Healthy Human Microbiome.” Nature 486 : 207–214. 10.1038/nature11234 22699609
53 Ghannoum, Mahmoud A. , Richard J. Jurevic , Pranab K. Mukherjee , Fan Cui , Masoumeh Sikaroodi , Ammar Naqvi , and Patrick M. Gillevet . 2010. “Characterization of the Oral Fungal Microbiome (Mycobiome) in Healthy Individuals.” PLoS Pathogens 6 : e1000713. 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000713 20072605
54 Perera, Manosha , Nezar Noor Al‐Hebshi , Irosha Perera , Deepak Ipe , Glen C. Ulett , David J. Speicher , Tsute Chen , and Newell W. Johnson . 2017. “A Dysbiotic Mycobiome Dominated by Candida albicans is Identified Within Oral Squamous‐Cell Carcinomas.” Journal of Oral Microbiology 9 : 1385369. 10.1080/20002297.2017.1385369 29152157
55 Tillonen, J. , N. Homann , M. Rautio , H. Jousimies‐Somer , and M. Salaspuro . 1999. “Role of Yeasts in the Salivary Acetaldehyde Production From Ethanol Among Risk Groups for Ethanol‐Associated Oral Cavity Cancer.” Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research 23 : 1409–1411. 10.1111/j.1530-0277.1999.tb04364.x 10470985
56 Theruvathu, Jacob A. , Pawel Jaruga , Raghu G. Nath , Miral Dizdaroglu , and P. J. Brooks . 2005. “Polyamines Stimulate the Formation of Mutagenic 1,N2‐propanodeoxyguanosine Adducts From Acetaldehyde.” Nucleic Acids Research 33 : 3513–3520. 10.1093/nar/gki661 15972793
57 Gainza‐Cirauqui, M. L. , M. T. Nieminen , L. Novak Frazer , J. M. Aguirre‐Urizar , M. D. Moragues , and R. Rautemaa . 2013. “Production of Carcinogenic Acetaldehyde by Candida albicans from Patients With Potentially Malignant Oral Mucosal Disorders.” Journal of Oral Pathology & Medicine 42 : 243–249. 10.1111/j.1600-0714.2012.01203.x 22909057
58 Alnuaimi, Ali D. , Adlin N. Ramdzan , David Wiesenfeld , Neil M. O'Brien‐Simpson , Spas D. Kolev , Eric C. Reynolds , and Michael J. McCullough . 2016. “ Candida Virulence and Ethanol‐Derived Acetaldehyde Production in Oral Cancer and Non‐cancer Subjects.” Oral Diseases 22 : 805–814. 10.1111/odi.12565 27495361
59 Sanjaya, P. R. , S. Gokul , B. Gururaj Patil , and Ramanjeneya Raju . 2011. “ Candida in Oral Pre‐cancer and Oral Cancer.” Medical Hypotheses 77 : 1125–1128. 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.09.018 21978967
60 Islami, Farhad , Ann Goding Sauer , Kimberly D. Miller , Rebecca L. Siegel , Stacey A. Fedewa , Eric J. Jacobs , Marjorie L. McCullough , et al. 2018. “Proportion and Number of Cancer Cases and Deaths Attributable to Potentially Modifiable Risk Factors in the United States.” CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians 68 : 31–54. 10.3322/caac.21440 29160902
61 Huang, Yanqian , Meng Zhu , Mengmeng Ji , Jingyi Fan , Junxing Xie , Xiaoxia Wei , Xiangxiang Jiang , et al. 2021. “Air Pollution, Genetic Factors, and the Risk of Lung Cancer: A Prospective Study in the UK Biobank.” American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 204 : 817–825. 10.1164/rccm.202011-4063OC 34252012
62 Rahal, Zahraa , and Humam Kadara . 2023. “Beyond Bacteria: How the Intratumor Mycobiome Modulates Lung Adenocarcinoma Progression.” Cancer Cell 41 : 1846–1848. 10.1016/j.ccell.2023.09.002 37774700
63 Hayes, R. B. , J. P. van Nieuwenhuize , J. W. Raatgever , and F. J. W. Ten Kate . 1984. “Aflatoxin Exposures in the Industrial Setting: An Epidemiological Study of Mortality.” Food and Chemical Toxicology 22 : 39–43. 10.1016/0278-6915(84)90050-4 6537935
64 Donnelly, Patty J. , Richard K. Stewart , Sophia L. Ali , A. Alan Conlan , Ken R. Reid , Dimitri Petsikas , and Thomas E. Massey . 1996. “Biotransformation of Aflatoxin B1 in Human Lung.” Carcinogenesis 17 : 2487–2494. 10.1093/carcin/17.11.2487 8968067
65 Cui, Anguo , Hui Hua , Ting Shao , Peiying Song , Qingbin Kong , Ting Luo , and Yangfu Jiang . 2015. “Aflatoxin B1 Induces Src Phosphorylation and Stimulates Lung Cancer Cell Migration.” Tumor Biology 36 : 6507–6513. 10.1007/s13277-015-3341-2 25820822
66 Mulder, Jeanne E. , Patricia V. Turner , and Thomas E. Massey . 2015. “Effect of 8‐Oxoguanine Glycosylase Deficiency on Aflatoxin B1 Tumourigenicity in Mice.” Mutagenesis 30 : 401–409. 10.1093/mutage/geu087 25583175
67 He, Xiao‐Yang , Lili Tang , Shou‐Lin Wang , Qing‐Song Cai , Jia‐Sheng Wang , and Jun‐Yan Hong . 2006. “Efficient Activation of Aflatoxin B1by Cytochrome P450 2A13, an Enzyme Predominantly Expressed in Human Respiratory Tract.” International Journal of Cancer 118 : 2665–2671. 10.1002/ijc.21665 16385575
68 Banerjee, Sagarika , Tian Tian , Zhi Wei , Natalie Shih , Michael D. Feldman , Kristen N. Peck , Angela M. DeMichele , James C. Alwine , and Erle S. Robertson . 2018. “Distinct Microbial Signatures Associated With Different Breast Cancer Types.” Frontiers in Microbiology 9 : 951. 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00951 29867857
69 Banerjee, Sagarika , Zhi Wei , Tian Tian , Dipayan Bose , Natalie N. C. Shih , Michael D. Feldman , Thaer Khoury , Angela De Michele , and Erle S. Robertson . 2021. “Prognostic Correlations With the Microbiome of Breast Cancer Subtypes.” Cell Death & Disease 12 : 831. 10.1038/s41419-021-04092-x 34482363
70 Shiao, Stephen L. , Kathleen M. Kershaw , Jose J. Limon , Sungyong You , Junhee Yoon , Emily Y. Ko , Jlenia Guarnerio , et al. 2021. “Commensal Bacteria and Fungi Differentially Regulate Tumor Responses to Radiation Therapy.” Cancer Cell 39 : 1202–1213.e6. 10.1016/j.ccell.2021.07.002 34329585
71 Szóstak, Natalia , Luiza Handschuh , Anna Samelak‐Czajka , Katarzyna Tomela , Marcin Schmidt , Łukasz Pruss , Kaja Milanowska‐Zabel , Piotr Kozlowski , and Anna Philips . 2023. “Host Factors Associated With Gut Mycobiome Structure.” mSystems 8 : e0098622. 10.1128/msystems.00986-22 36786595
72 David, Lawrence A. , Corinne F. Maurice , Rachel N. Carmody , David B. Gootenberg , Julie E. Button , Benjamin E. Wolfe , Alisha V. Ling , et al. 2014. “Diet Rapidly and Reproducibly Alters the Human Gut Microbiome.” Nature 505 : 559–563. 10.1038/nature12820 24336217
73 Yeung, Frank , Ying‐Han Chen , Jian‐Da Lin , Jacqueline M. Leung , Caroline McCauley , Joseph C. Devlin , Christina Hansen , et al. 2020. “Altered Immunity of Laboratory Mice in the Natural Environment is Associated With Fungal Colonization.” Cell Host & Microbe 27 : 809–822.e6. 10.1016/j.chom.2020.02.015 32209432
74 Rumgay, Harriet , Neil Murphy , Pietro Ferrari , and Isabelle Soerjomataram . 2021. “Alcohol and Cancer: Epidemiology and Biological Mechanisms.” Nutrients 13 : 3173. 10.3390/nu13093173 34579050
75 Yang, An‐Ming , Tatsuo Inamine , Katrin Hochrath , Peng Chen , Lirui Wang , Cristina Llorente , Sena Bluemel , et al. 2017. “Intestinal Fungi Contribute to Development of Alcoholic Liver Disease.” Journal of Clinical Investigation 127 : 2829–2841. 10.1172/JCI90562 28530644
76 Doing, Georgia , Katja Koeppen , Patricia Occipinti , Colleen E. Harty , and Deborah A. Hogan . 2020. “Conditional Antagonism in Co‐Cultures of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Candida albicans: An Intersection of Ethanol and Phosphate Signaling Distilled from Dual‐Seq Transcriptomics.” PLoS Genetics 16 : e1008783. 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008783 32813693
77 Lang, Sonja , Yi Duan , Jinyuan Liu , Manolito G. Torralba , Claire Kuelbs , Meritxell Ventura‐Cots , Juan G. Abraldes , et al. 2020. “Intestinal Fungal Dysbiosis and Systemic Immune Response to Fungi in Patients With Alcoholic Hepatitis.” Hepatology 71 : 522–538. 10.1002/hep.30832 31228214
78 Richard, Mathias L. , Bruno Lamas , Giuseppina Liguori , Thomas W. Hoffmann , and Harry Sokol . 2015. “Gut Fungal Microbiota: The Yin and Yang of Inflammatory Bowel Disease.” Inflammatory Bowel Diseases 21 : 656–665. 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000261 25545379
79 Chehoud, Christel , Lindsey G. Albenberg , Colleen Judge , Christian Hoffmann , Stephanie Grunberg , Kyle Bittinger , Robert N. Baldassano , James D. Lewis , Frederic D. Bushman , and Gary D. Wu . 2015. “Fungal Signature in the Gut Microbiota of Pediatric Patients With Inflammatory Bowel Disease.” Inflammatory Bowel Diseases 21 : 1948–1956. 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000454 26083617
80 Zeng, Suling , Elisa Rosati , Carina Saggau , Berith Messner , Huikuan Chu , Yi Duan , Phillipp Hartmann , et al. 2023. “ Candida albicans‐specific Th17 Cell‐mediated Response Contributes to Alcohol‐Associated Liver Disease.” Cell Host & Microbe 31 : 389–404.e7. 10.1016/j.chom.2023.02.001 36893735
81 Meijnikman, Abraham S. , Mark Davids , Hilde Herrema , Omrum Aydin , Valentina Tremaroli , Melany Rios‐Morales , Han Levels , et al. 2022. “Microbiome‐Derived Ethanol in Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease.” Nature Medicine 28 : 2100–2106. 10.1038/s41591-022-02016-6
82 Chu, Huikuan , Yi Duan , Sonja Lang , Lu Jiang , Yanhan Wang , Cristina Llorente , Jinyuan Liu , et al. 2020. “The Candida albicans Exotoxin Candidalysin Promotes Alcohol‐Associated Liver Disease.” Journal of Hepatology 72 : 391–400. 10.1016/j.jhep.2019.09.029 31606552
83 Moyes, David L. , Duncan Wilson , Jonathan P. Richardson , Selene Mogavero , Shirley X. Tang , Julia Wernecke , Sarah Höfs , et al. 2016. “Candidalysin is a Fungal Peptide Toxin Critical for Mucosal Infection.” Nature 532 : 64–68. 10.1038/nature17625 27027296
84 Sun, Shanshan , Kai Wang , Li Sun , Baosong Cheng , Shanshan Qiao , Huanqin Dai , Wenyu Shi , Juncai Ma , and Hongwei Liu . 2020. “Therapeutic Manipulation of Gut Microbiota by Polysaccharides of Wolfiporia cocos Reveals the Contribution of the Gut Fungi‐Induced PGE2 to Alcoholic Hepatic Steatosis.” Gut Microbes 12 : 1830693. 10.1080/19490976.2020.1830693 33106075
85 Ioannou, George N. , Olivia B. Morrow , Marah L. Connole , and Sum P. Lee . 2009. “Association Between Dietary Nutrient Composition and the Incidence of Cirrhosis or Liver Cancer in the United States Population.” Hepatology 50 : 175–184. 10.1002/hep.22941 19441103
86 Zhang, Xiang , Olabisi Oluwabukola Coker , Eagle Sh Chu , Kaili Fu , Harry C. H. Lau , Yi‐Xiang Wang , Anthony W. H. Chan , et al. 2021. “Dietary Cholesterol Drives Fatty Liver‐Associated Liver Cancer by Modulating Gut Microbiota and Metabolites.” Gut 70 : 761–774. 10.1136/gutjnl-2019-319664 32694178
87 Wouters, Kristiaan , Patrick J. van Gorp , Veerle Bieghs , Marion J. Gijbels , Hans Duimel , Dieter Lütjohann , Anja Kerksiek , et al. 2008. “Dietary Cholesterol, Rather Than Liver Steatosis, Leads to Hepatic Inflammation in Hyperlipidemic Mouse Models of Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis.” Hepatology 48 : 474–486. 10.1002/hep.22363 18666236
88 Sun, Shanshan , Li Sun , Kai Wang , Shanshan Qiao , Xinyue Zhao , Xiaomin Hu , Wei Chen , et al. 2021. “The Gut Commensal Fungus, Candida parapsilosis, Promotes High Fat‐Diet Induced Obesity in Mice.” Communications Biology 4 : 1220. 10.1038/s42003-021-02753-3 34697386
89 Adlercreutz, Herman , Yaghoob Mousavi , Jim Clark , Krister Höckerstedt , Esa Hämäläinen , Kristiina Wähälä , Taru Mäkelä , and Tapio Hase . 1992. “Dietary Phytoestrogens and Cancer: In Vitro and In Vivo Studies.” The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 41 : 331–337. 10.1016/0960-0760(92)90359-q 1314077
90 Clemons, Karl V. , Jata Shankar , and David A. Stevens . 2016. “Mycologic Endocrinology.” Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology 874 : 337–363. 10.1007/978-3-319-20215-0_16 26589227
91 Patisaul, Heather B. , and Wendy Jefferson . 2010. “The Pros and Cons of Phytoestrogens.” Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology 31 : 400–419. 10.1016/j.yfrne.2010.03.003 20347861
92 Cheng, Georgina , Kathleen M. Yeater , and Lois L. Hoyer . 2006. “Cellular and Molecular Biology of Candida albicans Estrogen Response.” Eukaryotic Cell 5 : 180–191. 10.1128/Ec.5.1.180-191.2006 16400181
93 Cotch, Mary Frances , Sharon L. Hillier , Ronald S. Gibbs , David A. Eschenbach , and Vaginal Infections and Prematurity Study Group . 1998. “Epidemiology and Outcomes Associated With Moderate to Heavy Candida Colonization During Pregnancy.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 178 : 374–380. 10.1016/s0002-9378(98)80028-8 9500502
94 Sobel, Jack D. , Sabastian Faro , Rex W. Force , Betsy Foxman , William J. Ledger , Paul R. Nyirjesy , Barbara D. Reed , and Paul R. Summers . 1998. “Vulvovaginal Candidiasis: Epidemiologic, Diagnostic, and Therapeutic Considerations.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 178 : 203–211. 10.1016/s0002-9378(98)80001-x 9500475
95 Shankar, Jata , Thomas D. Wu , Karl V. Clemons , Jomar P. Monteiro , Laurence F. Mirels , and David A. Stevens . 2011. “Influence of 17β‐Estradiol on Gene Expression of Paracoccidioides During Mycelia‐to‐Yeast Transition.” PLoS ONE 6 : e28402. 10.1371/journal.pone.0028402 22194832
96 Yu, Dan , Libin Xie , Wei Chen , Jin Qin , Jingjing Zhang , Min Lei , Yue Wang , et al. 2022. “Dynamics of the Gut Bacteria and Fungi Accompanying Low‐Carbohydrate Diet‐Induced Weight Loss in Overweight and Obese Adults.” Frontiers in Nutrition 9 : 846378. 10.3389/fnut.2022.846378 35223965
97 Hoffmann, Christian , Serena Dollive , Stephanie Grunberg , Jun Chen , Hongzhe Li , Gary D. Wu , James D. Lewis , and Frederic D. Bushman . 2013. “Archaea and Fungi of the Human Gut Microbiome: Correlations With Diet and Bacterial Residents.” PLoS ONE 8 : e66019. 10.1371/journal.pone.0066019 23799070
98 Van Ende, Mieke , Stefanie Wijnants , and Patrick Van Dijck . 2019. “Sugar Sensing and Signaling in Candida albicans and Candida glabrata .” Frontiers in Microbiology 10 : 99. 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00099 30761119
99 Köhler, Julia R. , and Gerald R. Fink . 1996. “ Candida albicans Strains Heterozygous and Homozygous for Mutations in Mitogen‐Activated Protein Kinase Signaling Components Have Defects in Hyphal Development.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93 : 13223–13228. 10.1073/pnas.93.23.13223
100 Williams, Robert B. , and Michael C. Lorenz . 2020. “Multiple Alternative Carbon Pathways Combine to Promote Candida albicans Stress Resistance, Immune Interactions, and Virulence.” mBio 11 : e03070‐03019. 10.1128/mBio.03070-19 31937647
101 Ene, Iuliana V. , Ashok K. Adya , Silvia Wehmeier , Alexandra C. Brand , Donna M. MacCallum , Neil A. R. Gow , and Alistair J. P. Brown . 2012. “Host Carbon Sources Modulate Cell Wall Architecture, Drug Resistance and Virulence in a Fungal Pathogen.” Cellular Microbiology 14 : 1319–1335. 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2012.01813.x 22587014
102 Clinton, Steven K. , Edward L. Giovannucci , and Stephen D. Hursting . 2020. “The World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research Third Expert Report on Diet, Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Cancer: Impact and Future Directions.” The Journal of Nutrition 150 : 663–671. 10.1093/jn/nxz268 31758189
103 Martin‐Gallausiaux, Camille , Ludovica Marinelli , Hervé M. Blottière , Pierre Larraufie , and Nicolas Lapaque . 2021. “SCFA: Mechanisms and Functional Importance in the Gut.” Proceedings of the Nutrition Society 80 : 37–49. 10.1017/S0029665120006916 32238208
104 Shuai, Menglei , Yuanqing Fu , Hai‐Li Zhong , Wanglong Gou , Zengliang Jiang , Yuhui Liang , Zelei Miao , et al. 2022. “Mapping the Human Gut Mycobiome in Middle‐Aged and Elderly Adults: Multiomics Insights and Implications for Host Metabolic Health.” Gut 71 : 1812–1820. 10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326298 35017200
105 Levine, Morgan E. , Jorge A. Suarez , Sebastian Brandhorst , Priya Balasubramanian , Chia‐Wei Cheng , Federica Madia , Luigi Fontana , et al. 2014. “Low Protein Intake is Associated With a Major Reduction in IGF‐1, Cancer, and Overall Mortality in the 65 and Younger But Not Older Population.” Cell Metabolism 19 : 407–417. 10.1016/j.cmet.2014.02.006 24606898
106 Lai, Renxu , Zhuang Bian , Hong Lin , Jiangnan Ren , Huaili Zhou , and Huixue Guo . 2017. “The Association Between Dietary Protein Intake and Colorectal Cancer Risk: A Meta‐Analysis.” World Journal of Surgical Oncology 15 : 169. 10.1186/s12957-017-1241-1 28886717
107 Mao, Ye , Yan Tie , and Jing Du . 2018. “Association Between Dietary Protein Intake and Prostate Cancer Risk: Evidence from a Meta‐Analysis.” World Journal of Surgical Oncology 16 : 152. 10.1186/s12957-018-1452-0 30041648
108 Pang, Yanyang , and Wu Wang . 2018. “Dietary Protein Intake and Risk of Ovarian Cancer: Evidence from a Meta‐Analysis of Observational Studies.” Bioscience Reports 38 : BSR20181857. 10.1042/BSR20181857 30401730
109 Land, G. A. , W. C. McDonald , R. L. Stjernholm , and T. L. Friedman . 1975. “Factors Affecting Filamentation in Candida albicans: Relationship of the Uptake and Distribution of Proline to Morphogenesis.” Infection and Immunity 11 : 1014–1023. 10.1128/iai.11.5.1014-1023.1975 1091557
110 Rajendran, Ranjith , Ali May , Leighann Sherry , Ryan Kean , Craig Williams , Brian L. Jones , Karl V. Burgess , et al. 2016. “Integrating Candida albicans Metabolism With Biofilm Heterogeneity by Transcriptome Mapping.” Scientific Reports 6 : 35436. 10.1038/srep35436 27765942
111 Schrevens, Sanne , Griet Van Zeebroeck , Michael Riedelberger , Hélène Tournu , Karl Kuchler , and Patrick Van Dijck . 2018. “Methionine is Required for cAMP‐PKA‐Mediated Morphogenesis and Virulence of Candida albicans .” Molecular Microbiology 108 : 258–275. 10.1111/mmi.13933 29453849
112 Silao, Fitz Gerald S. , Meliza Ward , Kicki Ryman , Axel Wallström , Björn Brindefalk , Klas Udekwu , and Per O. Ljungdahl . 2019. “Mitochondrial Proline Catabolism Activates Ras1/cAMP/PKA‐induced Filamentation in Candida albicans .” PLoS Genetics 15 : e1007976. 10.1371/journal.pgen.1007976 30742618
113 Davis, Monica M. , Francisco J. Alvarez , Kicki Ryman , Åsa A. Holm , Per O. Ljungdahl , and Ylva Engström . 2011. “Wild‐Type Drosophila melanogaster as a Model Host to Analyze Nitrogen Source Dependent Virulence of Candida albicans .” PLoS ONE 6 : e27434. 10.1371/journal.pone.0027434 22110651
114 Krappmann, Sven , Elaine M. Bignell , Utz Reichard , Tom Rogers , Ken Haynes , and Gerhard H. Braus . 2004. “The Aspergillus fumigatus Transcriptional Activator CpcA Contributes Significantly to the Virulence of This Fungal Pathogen.” Molecular Microbiology 52 : 785–799. 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04015.x 15101984
115 Cassat, James E. , and Eric P. Skaar . 2012. “Metal Ion Acquisition in Staphylococcus aureus: Overcoming Nutritional Immunity.” Seminars in Immunopathology 34 : 215–235. 10.1007/s00281-011-0294-4 22048835
116 Malavia, Dhara , Laura E. Lehtovirta‐Morley , Omran Alamir , Elisabeth Weiß , Neil A. R. Gow , Bernhard Hube , and Duncan Wilson . 2017. “Zinc Limitation Induces a Hyper‐Adherent Goliath Phenotype in Candida albicans .” Frontiers in Microbiology 8 : 2238. 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02238 29184547
117 Ding, Chen , Richard A. Festa , Tian‐Shu Sun , and Zhan‐You Wang . 2014. “Iron and Copper as Virulence Modulators in Human Fungal Pathogens.” Molecular Microbiology 93 : 10–23. 10.1111/mmi.12653 24851950
118 Puri, Sumant , Rohitashw Kumar , Isolde G. Rojas , Ornella Salvatori , and Mira Edgerton . 2019. “Iron Chelator Deferasirox Reduces Candida albicans Invasion of Oral Epithelial Cells and Infection Levels in Murine Oropharyngeal Candidiasis.” Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 63 : e02152‐02118. 10.1128/AAC.02152-18 30718249
119 de Baaij, Jeroen H. F. , Joost G. J. Hoenderop , and René J. M. Bindels . 2015. “Magnesium in Man: Implications for Health and Disease.” Physiological Reviews 95 : 1–46. 10.1152/physrev.00012.2014 25540137
120 Cohrt, Karen A. O'Hanlon , Laura Marín , Lasse Kjellerup , Johannes D. Clausen , William Dalby‐Brown , José Antonio Calera , and Anne‐Marie Lund Winther . 2018. “Novel Zinc‐Attenuating Compounds as Potent Broad‐Spectrum Antifungal Agents With In Vitro and In Vivo Efficacy.” Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 62 : e02024‐02017. 10.1128/AAC.02024-17 29439980
121 Elicharová, Hana , Barbora Hušeková , and Hana Sychrová . 2016. “Three Candida albicans Potassium Uptake Systems Differ in Their Ability to Provide Saccharomyces cerevisiae trk1trk2 Mutants With Necessary Potassium.” FEMS Yeast Research 16 : fow039. 10.1093/femsyr/fow039 27189364
122 Liu, Ning‐Ning , Peter R. Flanagan , Jumei Zeng , Niketa M. Jani , Maria E. Cardenas , Gary P. Moran , and Julia R. Köhler . 2017. “Phosphate Is the Third Nutrient Monitored By TOR in Candida albicans and Provides a Target for Fungal‐Specific Indirect TOR Inhibition.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114 : 6346–6351. 10.1073/pnas.1617799114
123 Liu, Ning‐Ning , Maikel Acosta‐Zaldívar , Wanjun Qi , Joann Diray‐Arce , Louise A. Walker , Theodore J. Kottom , Rachel Kelly , et al. 2020. “Phosphoric Metabolites Link Phosphate Import and Polysaccharide Biosynthesis for Candida albicans Cell Wall Maintenance.” mBio 11 : e03225‐03219. 10.1128/mBio.03225-19 32184254
124 Liu, Ning‐Ning , Priya Uppuluri , Achille Broggi , Angelique Besold , Kicki Ryman , Hiroto Kambara , Norma Solis , et al. 2018. “Intersection of Phosphate Transport, Oxidative Stress and TOR Signalling in Candida albicans Virulence.” PLoS Pathogens 14 : e1007076. 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007076 30059535
125 de la Cruz Bonilla, Marimar , Kristina M. Stemler , Sabrina Jeter‐Jones , Tara N. Fujimoto , Jessica Molkentine , Gabriela M. Asencio Torres , Xiaomei Zhang , Russell R. Broaddus , Cullen M. Taniguchi , and Helen Piwnica‐Worms . 2019. “Fasting Reduces Intestinal Radiotoxicity, Enabling Dose‐Escalated Radiation Therapy for Pancreatic Cancer.” International Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biology, Physics 105 : 537–547. 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2019.06.2533 31271824
126 Lu, Zhigang , Jingjing Xie , Guojin Wu , Jinhui Shen , Robert Collins , Weina Chen , Xunlei Kang , et al. 2017. “Fasting Selectively Blocks Development of Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia via Leptin‐Receptor Upregulation.” Nature Medicine 23 : 79–90. 10.1038/nm.4252
127 Berrigan, David , Susan N. Perkins , Diana C. Haines , and Stephen D. Hursting . 2002. “Adult‐Onset Calorie Restriction and Fasting Delay Spontaneous Tumorigenesis in p53‐deficient Mice.” Carcinogenesis 23 : 817–822. 10.1093/carcin/23.5.817 12016155
128 Kusuoka, Osamu , Rina Fujiwara‐Tani , Chie Nakashima , Kiyomu Fujii , Hitoshi Ohmori , Takuya Mori , Shingo Kishi , et al. 2018. “Intermittent Calorie Restriction Enhances Epithelial‐Mesenchymal Transition Through the Alteration of Energy Metabolism in a Mouse Tumor Model.” International Journal of Oncology 52 : 413–423. 10.3892/ijo.2017.4229 29345287
129 Schwingshackl, Lukas , Carolina Schwedhelm , Cecilia Galbete , and Georg Hoffmann . 2017. “Adherence to Mediterranean Diet and Risk of Cancer: An Updated Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis.” Nutrients 9 : 1063. 10.3390/nu9101063 28954418
130 Klement, Rainer J. , Colin E. Champ , Christoph Otto , and Ulrike Kämmerer . 2016. “Anti‐Tumor Effects of Ketogenic Diets in Mice: A Meta‐Analysis.” PLoS ONE 11 : e0155050. 10.1371/journal.pone.0155050 27159218
131 Fontana, Luigi , Remi M. Adelaiye , Antonella L. Rastelli , Kiersten Marie Miles , Eric Ciamporcero , Valter D. Longo , Holly Nguyen , Robert Vessella , and Roberto Pili . 2013. “Dietary Protein Restriction Inhibits Tumor Growth in Human Xenograft Models.” Oncotarget 4 : 2451–2461. 10.18632/oncotarget.1586 24353195
132 Dinu, Monica , Rosanna Abbate , Gian Franco Gensini , Alessandro Casini , and Francesco Sofi . 2017. “Vegetarian, Vegan Diets and Multiple Health Outcomes: A Systematic Review With Meta‐Analysis of Observational Studies.” Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 57 : 3640–3649. 10.1080/10408398.2016.1138447 26853923
133 Padder, Sajad Ahmad , Rajendra Prasad , and Abdul Haseeb Shah . 2018. “Quorum Sensing: A Less Known Mode of Communication Among Fungi.” Microbiological Research 210 : 51–58. 10.1016/j.micres.2018.03.007 29625658
134 Polke, Melanie , Bernhard Hube , and Ilse D. Jacobsen . 2015. “ Candida Survival Strategies.” Advances in Applied Microbiology 91 : 139–235. 10.1016/bs.aambs.2014.12.002 25911234
135 Hirota, K. , H. Yumoto , B. Sapaar , T. Matsuo , T. Ichikawa , and Y. Miyake . 2017. “Pathogenic Factors in Candida Biofilm‐Related Infectious Diseases.” Journal of Applied Microbiology 122 : 321–330. 10.1111/jam.13330 27770500
136 Barssotti, Leticia , Isabel C. M. E. Abreu , Ana Beatriz P. Brandão , Raquel C. M. F. Albuquerque , Fabiana G. Ferreira , Miguel A. C. Salgado , Danielle D. S. Dias , et al. 2021. “ Saccharomyces boulardii Modulates Oxidative Stress and Renin Angiotensin System Attenuating Diabetes‐Induced Liver Injury in Mice.” Scientific Reports 11 : 9189. 10.1038/s41598-021-88497-w 33911129
137 Albuquerque, R. C. M. F. , A. B. P. Brandão , I. C. M. E. De Abreu , F. G. Ferreira , L. B. Santos , L. N. Moreira , C. R. Taddei , F. Aimbire , and T. S. Cunha . 2019. “ Saccharomyces boulardii Tht 500101 Changes Gut Microbiota and Ameliorates Hyperglycaemia, Dyslipidaemia, and Liver Inflammation in Streptozotocin‐Diabetic Mice.” Beneficial Microbes 10 : 901–912. 10.3920/BM2019.0056 31965836
138 Fernández‐Pacheco, Pilar , Inés María Ramos Monge , Mónica Fernández‐González , Justa María Poveda Colado , and María Arévalo‐Villena . 2021. “Safety Evaluation of Yeasts With Probiotic Potential.” Frontiers in Nutrition 8 : 659328. 10.3389/fnut.2021.659328 34095190
139 Keller, Nancy P. 2019. “Fungal Secondary Metabolism: Regulation, Function and Drug Discovery.” Nature Reviews Microbiology 17 : 167–180. 10.1038/s41579-018-0121-1 30531948
140 Scott, Benjamin M. , Cristina Gutiérrez‐Vázquez , Liliana M. Sanmarco , Jessica A. da Silva Pereira , Zhaorong Li , Agustín Plasencia , Patrick Hewson , et al. 2021. “Self‐Tunable Engineered Yeast Probiotics for the Treatment of Inflammatory Bowel Disease.” Nature Medicine 27 : 1212–1222. 10.1038/s41591-021-01390-x
141 Zou, Zhen‐Ping , Yue Du , Ting‐Ting Fang , Ying Zhou , and Bang‐Ce Ye . 2023. “Biomarker‐Responsive Engineered Probiotic Diagnoses, Records, and Ameliorates Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Mice.” Cell Host & Microbe 31 : 199–212.e5. 10.1016/j.chom.2022.12.004 36758520
