
==== Front
JBI Evid Synth
JBI Evid Synth
SRX
Jbi Evidence Synthesis
2689-8381
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins Hagerstown, MD

38622942
JBIES-24-00073
10.11124/JBIES-24-00073
00001
3
Editorial
Health Policy
Unlocking the power of global collaboration: building a stronger evidence ecosystem together
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9125-1582
Jordan Zoe 1zoe.jordan@adelaide.edu.au

Welch Vivian 2vwelch@campbellcollaboration.org

Soares-Weiser Karla ksoares-weiser@cochrane.org
3
1 JBI, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia
2 Campbell Collaboration, Ottawa, ON, Canada
3 Cochrane Collaboration, London, United Kingdom
Correspondence: Zoe Jordan, zoe.jordan@adelaide.edu.au
6 2024
16 4 2024
22 6 947948
COPYRIGHT © 2024 THE AUTHORS. PUBLISHED BY WOLTERS KLUWER HEALTH, INC. ON BEHALF OF JBI.
2024
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Com-mons Attribution License 4.0 (CCBY), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

OPEN-ACCESSTRUE
==== Body
pmcAcross the global evidence ecosystem, numerous organizations share a common vision and mission: to promote evidence-based decision-making worldwide. These organizations, including JBI, the Cochrane Collaboration, and the Campbell Collaboration, have each made an indelible imprint on the evidence-based movement and have been identified as “a crucial mechanism to facilitate the synthesis, transfer, and implementation of evidence into health care policy and practice.”1(p.211) While the benefits of global collaboration have been well established for some time, achieving impact at scale will require a fundamental shift in mindset.

The COVID-19 pandemic marked a turning point for evidence-based health care and decision-making. It provided a unique context whereby policymakers, health care providers, researchers, and the public required immediate access to trustworthy evidence to make decisions. We collectively faced major challenges in translating a rapidly evolving body of new evidence into tangible response efforts, with health policy decisions receiving unprecedented public attention. The “stress test” of COVID-19, and the many post-pandemic initiatives that followed, highlighted the need for more effective strategies, institutional mechanisms, and capacities to systematically mobilize and contextualize the best available evidence for rapid decision-making for effective and equitable public health responses.2–4

Each of our organizations responded to COVID-19 in different ways and were able to provide access to reliable evidence. Yet, it is essential to acknowledge the challenges of sustaining funding, upholding methodological rigor, and ensuring diversity and inclusivity in our collective endeavors. Our demonstrated success in enhancing global health care, education, and social policy underscores the value of collaborative, evidence-based approaches in addressing the world’s most pressing challenges.

We find ourselves at a unique juncture where our respective global collaborative evidence networks (JBI, Cochrane, and Campbell) must reimagine the way we work together to facilitate and engage in multidisciplinary, transdisciplinary, and interdisciplinary research, dissemination, knowledge sharing, and knowledge translation to generate impact at scale across the evidence ecosystem. It is time to develop interagency collaboration as a coherent program rather than a series of standalone efforts. There is significant potential in our ability to orchestrate, integrate, coordinate, and align our activities to identify opportunities for mutual benefit, learning, and impact.

A call to action

One of the most significant benefits of our respective global networks is our capacity to transcend geographic boundaries. By facilitating better global interagency collaboration, we enable the pooling of expertise and knowledge in the field of evidence-based practice, and the result is a more holistic and nuanced understanding of complex issues, leading to improved decision-making at both local and global levels. Examples of this may include much deeper collaboration on methodologies and standards for synthesis that reflect the diversity of evidence to respond to global challenges; a more coordinated approach to the prioritization of synthesis efforts to avoid duplication of effort; and better, more meaningful partnership on the contextualization or localization of evidence for policy and practice.

Going forward, it is incumbent upon us to support and strengthen our networks and the relationships between them, recognizing the invaluable contributions we can collectively make to improving the well-being of individuals and communities around the world. The path to a brighter, more evidence-based future lies in continued collaboration and our unwavering commitment to the delivery of trustworthy evidence. Collaboration across our global networks, not just within them, is now not merely a choice but a necessity in our increasingly interconnected world.

ZJ is executive director of JBI. VW is editor in chief of the Campbell Collaboration. KSW is editor in chief of the Cochrane Library.

This article has been published simultaneously in JBI Evidence Synthesis, Campbell Systematic Reviews, and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. The articles are identical except for minor stylistic and spelling differences in keeping with each journal’s style. Any of these journals can be used when citing this article.
==== Refs
References

1 Pilla B Jordan Z Christian R Kynoch K McInerney P Cooper K . JBI series paper 4: the role of collaborative evidence networks in promoting and supporting evidence-based health care globally: reflections from 25 years across 38 countries. J Clin Epidemiol 2022;150 :210–15.35462046
2 Global Commission on Evidence to Address Societal Challenges . The Evidence Commission report: a wake-up call and path forward for decision-makers, evidence intermediaries, and impact-oriented evidence producers. McMaster Health Forum; 2022.
3 World Health Organization Evidence-informed Policy Network (EVIPNet) . Together on the road to evidence-informed decision-making for health in the post-pandemic era: a call for action [internet]. No. WHO/SCI/RFH/2021.08. WHO; 2021 [cited 2023 Sep 21]. Available from: https://iris.who.int/bitstream/handle/10665/350883/WHO-SCI-RFH-2021.08-eng.pdf.
4 Stibbe D Prescott D ; The Partnering Initiative; UN DESA 2020. The SDG Partnership Guidebook: a practical guide to building high-impact multi-stakeholder partnerships for the Sustainable Development Goals [internet]. United Nations and The Partnering Initiative; 2022 [cited 2023 Sep 21]. Available from: https://sdgs.un.org/sites/default/files/2022-02/SDG%20Partnership%20Guidebook%201.11.pdf.
