
==== Front
Glob Chall
Glob Chall
10.1002/(ISSN)2056-6646
GCH2
Global Challenges
2056-6646
John Wiley and Sons Inc. Hoboken

10.1002/gch2.202300073
GCH21518
Review
Reviews
Updates on Hydrogen Value Chain: A Strategic Roadmap
Garcia‐Navarro Julio 1 *
Isaacs Mark A. 2 3 *
Favaro Marco 4 marco.favaro@helmholtz-berlin.de

*
Ren Dan 5 *
Ong Wee‐Jun 6 7 8 9 *
Grätzel Michael 10 *
Jiménez‐Calvo Pablo https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9826-6995
11 12 pablo.jimenez-calvo@mpikg.mpg.de

*
1 Stichting New Energy Coalition Nijenborgh 6 Groningen 9747 AG The Netherlands
2 Department of Chemistry University College London 20 Gower Street London WC1H 0AJ UK
3 HarwellXPS Research Complex at Harwell Rutherford Appleton Lab Didcot OX11 0FA UK
4 Institute for Solar Fuels Helmholtz‐Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energy GmbH Hahn‐Meitner‐Platz 1 14109 Berlin Germany
5 School of Chemical Engineering and Technology Xi'an Jiaotong University West Xianning Road 28 Xi'an 710049 China
6 School of Energy and Chemical Engineering Xiamen University Malaysia Darul Ehsan Selangor 43900 Malaysia
7 Center of Excellence for Nano Energy & Catalysis Technology (CONNECT) Xiamen University Malaysia Darul Ehsan Selangor 43900 Malaysia
8 State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering Xiamen University Xiamen 361005 China
9 Shenzhen Research Institute of Xiamen University Shenzhen 518057 China
10 Laboratory of Photonics and Interfaces Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) Lausanne 1015 Switzerland
11 Department of Colloid Chemistry Max‐Planck‐Institute of Colloids and Interfaces Am Mühlenberg 1 14476 Potsdam Germany
12 Present address: Department of Materials Science WW4‐LKO University of Erlangen‐Nuremberg Martensstraße 7 91058 Erlangen Germany
* E‐mail: marco.favaro@helmholtz-berlin.de; pablo.jimenez-calvo@mpikg.mpg.de

08 7 2023
6 2024
8 6 10.1002/gch2.v8.6 Towards Renewable Solar Energy Systems: Advances in Photocatalytic Green Hydrogen Production 230007321 5 2023
10 4 2023
© 2023 The Authors. Global Challenges published by Wiley‐VCH GmbH
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Abstract

A strategic roadmap for noncarbonized fuels is a global priority, and the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions is a key focus of the Paris Agreement to mitigate the effects of rising temperatures. In this context, hydrogen is a promising noncarbonized fuel, but the pace of its implementation will depend on the engineering advancements made at each step of its value chain. To accelerate its adoption, various applications of hydrogen across industries, transport, power, and building sectors have been identified, where it can be used as a feedstock, fuel, or energy carrier and storage. However, widespread usage of hydrogen will depend on its political, industrial, and social acceptance. It is essential to carefully assess the hydrogen value chain and compare it with existing solar technologies. The major challenge to widespread adoption of hydrogen is its cost as outlined in the roadmap for hydrogen. It needs to be produced at the levelized cost of hydrogen of less than $2 kg−1 to be competitive with the established process of steam methane reforming. Therefore, this review provides a comprehensive analysis of each step of the hydrogen value chain, outlining both the current challenges and recent advances.

This review outlines the hydrogen (H2) value chain: production, transport, storage, and consumption. Green and white H2 holds promise for the future. Repurposing natural gas infrastructure and exploring H2 shipping methods pose challenges and opportunities. Salt caverns offer storage potential. H2 is crucial in industry, mobility, and the built environment, but faces challenges in social acceptance and transport infrastructure.

consumption
hydrogen
production
storage
transport
value chain
Marie Skłodowska‐Curie101068996 Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung 10.13039/501100002347 03EW0015A source-schema-version-number2.0
cover-dateJune 2024
details-of-publishers-convertorConverter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.4.4 mode:remove_FC converted:11.06.2024
J. Garcia‐Navarro , M. A. Isaacs , M. Favaro , D. Ren , W.‐J. Ong , M. Grätzel , P. Jiménez‐Calvo , Updates on Hydrogen Value Chain: A Strategic Roadmap. Global Challenges 2024, 8 , 2300073. 10.1002/gch2.202300073
==== Body
pmc1 Introduction

Decarbonization, strive for net zero emissions, and work to reduce our carbon footprint. These crucial actions are indispensable in addressing the climate change challenges. By embracing decarbonization strategies and adopting sustainable practices, we can alleviate the detrimental impacts of greenhouse gas emissions and protect the well‐being of the planet and future generations.[ 1 ]

Paris agreement in 2015 introduced the “national low‐carbon strategy” and has emerged as a vital instrument. This ambitious roadmap not only serves as a guiding light but also forms the bedrock for our collective endeavor to foster a low‐carbon economy. The strategy framework delineates a path that advocates for the adoption of energy‐efficient and the utilization of renewable energy sources.[ 1 , 2 ]

In this context, hydrogen (H2) is expected to play a significant and central role in our future society, particularly within the current efforts to transition to a low‐carbon economy.[ 3 ] The main reasons why H2 is becoming such an important commodity are: H2 is a clean energy source, producing no greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions when used in fuel cells to produce electricity. This makes it an attractive alternative to fossil fuels.

H2 is a versatile energy carrier that can be used in a variety of applications, from fuel cells for transportation to power/heat/electricity generation and industrial processes, e.g., fertilizers.

H2 can be used as an energy storage medium, allowing excess energy from intermittent renewable sources such as solar and wind to be stored efficiently and used when needed.

The development of a H2 infrastructure which encompasses production, storage, and transportation, would create new jobs and economic opportunities in the energy sector.

The use of H2 in transportation and other applications can support the efforts reducing GHG emissions, thereby mitigating the impact of climate change.

As described previously, the H2 value chain consists of three primary areas: production, storage, and distribution (transport) that enable end‐user consumption. Figure 1 depicts the layout of the aforementioned fields and their interconnectivity. Yet, each stage faces unique barriers to overcome. Experts from different fields are exploring solutions to provide timely technological transfer options.

Figure 1 Scheme outlining the hydrogen value chain fields, interconnection, and roles. Reproduced with permission.[ 4 ] Copyright 2023, TÜV SÜD.

The global market demands certain maturity of emerging technologies to deliver them to the end users. Within the hydrogen economy context, the different aspects of the value chain should achieve technological readiness level (TRL) 7 or higher, to make H2 and its infrastructures economically (and politically) attractive.

The following sections will showcase each category of the H2 value chain, including the main associated challenges.

2 Hydrogen Production

Hydrogen production has gained an enormous momentum over the last few years and will certainly play a major role in the energy transition. The reasons behind the growing importance of H2 for our modern economy are: 1) decarbonization of energy production, in particular electricity, 2) sustainable alternative to fossil energy carriers (in particular natural gas), and 3) the lack of cost‐effective energy storage of intermittent renewable energy (mostly produced in the form of electricity).

There are three main families of H2 production technologies that are categorized by their “carbon‐intensity,” i.e., the amount of CO2 and CO2‐equivalents emitted during production of H2. These are described in the following sub‐sections in descending order of carbon‐intensity.

2.1 Grey hydrogen

Grey H2 is produced by dehydrogenation of fossil fuels. There are two grey H2 production processes: Reforming: H2 is produced by reacting a fossil fuel with steam, thereby releasing H2 as well as carbon monoxide, a mixture commonly referred to as “syngas” (1) CmHn+mH2O→mCO+m+n/2H2

Partial oxidation: in this process, a fossil fuel is combusted with a sub‐stoichiometric amount of oxygen, leading to the production of syngas (2) CmHn+m/2O2→mCO+n/2H2

The stoichiometric factors for reforming and partial oxidation (Equations (1) and (2) are 1 for m, and 4 for n.

Steam methane reforming (SMR) is the leading process to produce grey H2. In 2021, the global H2 demand reached a peak of 94 Mt.[ 5 ] Currently, about 48% of the H2 produced worldwide (≈45 Mt in 2021) comes from SMR.[ 6 , 7 ] This process consists of dehydrogenating methane (commonly from a natural gas stream) to produce a hydrogen‐rich mixture, and it is the cheapest at the industrial scale. However, its environmental impact is very high: every kg of H2 produced in this way generates around 8 kg of CO2, indirectly.[ 7 ] Oil and coal gasification are still heavily used, accounting for the 30% (≈28 Mt) and 18% (≈17 Mt) of the world's H2 production in 2021, respectively.[ 7 ] Typically, grey H2 production processes include additional steps (e.g., water–gas shift and acid gas removal) to maximize the H2 yield and separate the carbon oxides from the H2 stream.

Among the traditional methods of producing grey H2 (reforming and partial oxidation), autothermal reforming (ATR) is used in less proportion. ATR consists of the reforming of light alkanes (typically methane) using purified oxygen and carbon dioxide or water steam. Due to the exothermic character of reactions occurring during methane ATR, the overall process has the ability of self‐maintaining the reaction temperature, thereby approaching zero net enthalpy.[ 8 ]

2.2 Blue Hydrogen

The production process of blue H2 is similar to that of grey H2; the main difference is that blue H2 includes the carbon capture and either utilization or storage (CCUS). The capture of carbon consists of the separation of CO2 from a mixture (e.g., a flue gas from a combustion process or a CO2‐rich natural gas stream) via physical or chemical means. The separation of carbon from the fuel is typically done using one of three methods: Precombustion—the carbon is separated from the fuel before being combusted, as in analogy to the SMR process;

Postcombustion—the carbon is separated after the fuel has been used to generate energy; and

Oxyfuel combustion—this technology is similar to postcombustion, but oxygen is used instead of air to combust the carbon‐rich fuel, leading to a more complete combustion that releases less CO and has an inherently higher efficiency.

Although there are different processes to separate the resulting CO2, most used carbon capture processes rely on postcombustion technologies. Table 1 showcases how postcombustion carbon capture is performed, as well as the advantages and challenges of each technology.[ 9 ]

Table 1 Overview of the CO2 separation technologies

CO2 separation method	Description	Strengths	Challenges	Ref.	
Absorption	CO2 is absorbed in a fluid (called absorbant) that selectively binds to the CO2. The CO2 is then released from the absorbant (regeneration)

Typical absorbants: monoethanolamine (MEA)[ 9 ]

	Mature technology, has been in use for 100 years; also known as “amine sweetening,” “acid gas removal” or “amine gas treating” (used to remove H2S and CO2 from natural gas)

Good CO2 selectivity

High absorption rate

Easy to retrofit existing plants to include it

	Absorbant regeneration is energy‐intensive and costly for the recovery

Corrosiveness of absorbent

Loss of solvent

Involving toxic chemicals (aliphatic amines)

	[9, 10, 11, 12]	
Adsorption	CO2 is adsorbed on the surface of a highly porous solid (called adsorbent) and later released from it (regeneration)

Typical adsorbents: activated carbon, zeolites, metal‐organic frameworks, carbon nanotubes

	Lower energy consumption to release CO2 from adsorbent	Adsorbent regeneration is energy‐intensive

Costly adsorbent

Low mass production of adsorbent

No widespread industrial applications yet (moderate TRL)

	[9, 10, 13, 14]	
Biological	Use of photosynthetic organisms for CO2 capture. Algae have better carbon stabilization than land plants	It preserves healthy lands, water, and air	Costly

The amount of land required to scale up this technology might be high

	[9, 10, 15, 16]	
Other technologies	Membrane separation – uses a membrane that is CO2‐permeable

Chemical looping – using a chemical (e.g., a metal oxide) to form carbonates, which can later be used to produce methane

	Lower energy consumption

Easier to adapt than other CO2 separation technologies

	Scaling‐up might be difficult.	[9, 10, 17, 18]	
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Carbon storage (or sequestration) is the process where the separated CO2 is injected in an underground geological formation. An important characteristic of this process is that CO2 is stored as a supercritical fluid (the critical point of CO2 is at 31 °C and 73 bar). Therefore, not all geological sites are suitable to store the injected CO2; often, depleted oil and gas wells are used (or at least considered), due to their ability to hold pressurized fluids. The main challenge of operating pressurized gas wells is to ensure that the gas will not escape either by permeation to the nearby soil or by displacement by another fluid (such as water). Here are a few important properties that ideal CO2 storage reservoirs[ 19 ] should present: Depth—it is recommended that the wells are at least 1 km underground to ensure that CO2 stays in the supercritical phase (i.e., to keep the pressure);

High capillary pressure—to prevent another fluid from entering the well; and

Low permeability—to prevent CO2 from leaving the well.

The main challenge of blue H2 (and CCUS) is primarily the social acceptance of this technology. Society views CCUS as “sweeping the problem under the rug:” CCUS may not constitute a long‐term carbon abatement method and it is simply viewed as “greenwashing” done by the oil and gas industry to maintain the current levels of fossil fuel dependency.

2.3 Green Hydrogen

Green H2 is produced by using water and sunlight (or renewable‐driven electricity). There are mainly three types of solar‐driven water electrolysis processes: photocatalytic (PC) water splitting, photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting, and photovoltaics (PV) combined with electrolysis.[ 20 , 21 ] Among the above three approaches, PV‐driven water splitting already reaches relatively high TRLs (TRL 7), with recently demonstrated solar‐to‐hydrogen (STH) efficiencies up to about 20%.[ 22 ] Higher efficiencies are foreseen in the near future using tandem solar cells based on improved hybrid organic‐inorganic perovskite light absorbers. Recently, the certified solar to electric power conversion efficiency (PCE) tandems of lead halide perovskite with silicon has reached 32.5%,[ 23 , 24 ] a value previously achieved only by expensive III/V semiconductors. Figure 2 reports the extraterrestrial/sea level solar spectra (AM0 and AM1.5), together with the portion of the spectrum accessible by a double junction, tandem perovskite/Si cell (see Figure 2 caption for details). The integration of the AM1.5 spectrum up to the near infrared (NIR) cutoff (1107 nm) set by the Si bottom absorber returns an accessible photon flux of about 2.46 × 1021 s−1 m−2. Given an PCE of 30%, the photon flux effectively converted into electricity (≈7.38 × 1020 s−1 m−2) generates a current density of almost 120 A m−2, provided by the PV module to the electrolyzer (for this estimation, the PCE was considered equal to 30% for both absorbers in the tandem device). Hence, there is the need to develop electrocatalysts able to provide current densities of about 20 mA cm−2 with minimal overvoltage losses, i.e., less than 0.3 V for extended periods of time (months or years), using cheap and earth‐abundant elements.[ 25 , 26 ] The water electrolyzer therefore represents the under‐developed component of this approach.[ 4 ]

Figure 2 AM0[ 27 ] and AM1.5[ 28 ] solar spectra, together with the portion of the spectrum accessible by a double junction tandem perovskite/Si solar cell. In this example, the hybrid organic/inorganic perovskite is the wide‐bandgap top absorber, with a bandgap of 1.68 eV[ 23 ] (cutoff at ≈740 nm). Single crystalline, n‐type silicon is the narrow‐bandgap bottom absorber, with a bandgap of 1.12 eV at room temperature [ 23 ] (cutoff at around 1107 nm). AM: Air Mass; UV: Ultraviolet radiation; VIS: Visible radiation; NIR: Near‐infrared radiation; SWIR: short wavelength infrared radiation.

Catalytic water splitting using photons or electricity occurs in a single step, as Equation (3) shows (3) H2+1/2O2→H2O

Water electrolysis processes have been extensively studied and reviewed in recent years, hence a vast amount of literature reviewing the processes already exists.[ 29 , 30 ]

Here we will only highlight the common production methods of green H2, that differ in the type of charge carrier that completes the electric circuit of the electrolytic cell (Figure 3 ): Alkaline electrolysis—the charge carrier is −OH. This is the most common process for producing high‐purity H2 for uses such as in the food industry (e.g., in the hydrogenation of triglycerides and fatty acids for human consumption) as well as in the current landscape of electrolytic H2 production for use as energy carrier.[ 31 ] Alkaline electrolyzers have been in use since the space age (where their main use was to electrolyze water to produce O2 for the astronauts) and they are a well‐developed technology.

PEM electrolysis—the charge carrier is H+. It has been developed in the past few decades using the existing knowledge from PEM fuel cells (as they share the same ion‐conducting polymer membrane). PEM electrolyzers use platinum group metals (PGM) as catalysts. This means that their widespread adoption could burden the supply chain of some components. However, they have an advantage over alkaline electrolyzers in their ability to quickly ramp‐up and ramp‐down to cope with the intermittency of renewable energy systems (RES). Thus, PEM electrolyzers are more suitable for direct connection to renewable electricity than alkaline electrolyzers. This eliminates the need to rely on the existing electricity transport infrastructure.

Solid oxide electrolysis (SOEC)—the charge carrier is O2−. This is a relatively recent development that incorporates progress achieved in the solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) industry. Whereas both alkaline and PEM electrolyzers operate at near‐ambient conditions, SO electrolyzers operate at temperatures above 700 °C, which implies that they are less suitable for dynamic operation. Furthermore, SO electrolyzers are at an earlier stage of development due in part to a similar status of SOFC technologies. A common challenge for all types of devices described above, is the current lack of large‐scale manufacture of electrolyzers, compared to the current ambitions and targets towards 2030 and beyond. As of 2020, the total worldwide electrolyzer manufacturing capacity was 20 MW/year (Figure  4 ), mostly due to electrolyzers being hand‐manufactured and tailored to individual customers. According to the European strategy on H2 drafted by the European Union (EU) in 2020, the plan is to reach 8.2 GW of electrolyzers by 2030.[ 32 ] The current disparity between the electrolyzers manufacturing capacity and the ambitious set targets can also be regarded as a potential windfall, given that the European interest in H2 could provide for a more certain panorama for private capital to invest in electrolyzer manufacture.

Figure 3 Schemes of a) alkaline water electrolyzer (AWE), b) proton exchange membrane water electrolyzer (PEMWE) and c) solid oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC). Reproduced with permission.[ 95 ] Copyright 2022, SciOpen.

Figure 4 Global electrolysis capacity (MW year−1) becoming operational annually, 2014–2023, historical and announced. Dark blue stands for total and light blue stands for largest project. Reproduced with permission.[ 33 ] Copyright 2022, IEA.

PC and PEC‐based water splitting have lower efficiencies (<1 and 10%, respectively) compared to the PV‐driven process.[ 3 , 34 ] However, PC and PEC water splitting are performed using only a catalyst in powder (as suspension or adhere to an electrode), water, and light, thereby making it a revolutionary technology due to its simplicity.[ 35 , 36 ] In fact, PC water splitting is considered the “holy grail” reaction in physical chemistry, as it can directly generate H2 from water. This is a significant advantage, as it enables the production of a solar fuel without the need for external electricity, resulting in lower operating expenses (OPEX) costs.

Photocatalysis by definition is a heterogeneous type of catalysis, requiring photons with adequate energy (see Figure 5 ) to activate the solid semiconductor/catalyst and split water into H2 gas.[ 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 ] Extensive research efforts have been dedicated to the development of binary and multinary metal oxide light absorbers for such applications.[ 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 ] This class of materials offers a wide range of optical and electronic properties, and generally shows good stability in aqueous environments.[ 48 ] Combined with a relatively wide bandgap, this makes semiconducting transition metal oxides particularly suited as top absorbers in tandem devices. This is a promising field to explore, since for oxides containing two metal cations about 19 000 different compositions are possible,[ 48 ] only a small fraction of which has been explored to date. The highest efficiency reported for a bias‐free (unassisted) tandem device with a silicon PV cell providing the lacking photovoltage along with a combination of BiVO4 and Fe2O3 photoanodes achieved ≈8%. Solar to hydrogen energy conversion efficiency.[ 49 ]

Figure 5 Schematic energy diagram of an H‐type photoelectrochemical cell equipped with a single‐junction semiconducting photoanode absorbing green light (≈495 nm, 2.5 eV) immersed in seawater, under nonequilibrium conditions. Note that the energy axes are not on scale (CB: conduction band; CBm: conduction band minimum; VB: valence band; VBM: valence band maximum; E F: Fermi level; E F,n: Quasi Fermi level for electrons; E F,p: Quasi Fermi level for holes; U: applied potential).

The use of PC and PEC reactions has shown promising results in producing fuels such as H2 or alcohols, as well as various chemical products including fine chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and agrochemicals. However, for these processes to become a viable alternative to fossil fuels, they must overcome significant challenges such as maturity, scalability, catalyst efficiency, reactor engineering, and cost.[ 50 ]

PC and PEC have a number of technical challenges to address, such as low photocatalytic activity, large band gap energy, fast recombination of photo‐generated electrons and holes, stability problems, poor light utilization, and cost.[ 51 ] Overcoming them requires rethinking current tendencies, concepts, and methods to enhance the understanding of the fundamentals of the technology.

Developments at the interface of materials science and engineering of chemical processes are envisaged. On the one hand, steps forward in each low (laboratory reactors), medium (pilot devices), and large (plants) TRLs are mandatory to foster larger H2 photoproduction plants.[ 3 , 52 , 53 ] On the other hand, rational design of efficient and stable photoabsorber/catalyst with intriguing aforementioned properties is a high demand task. The importance of this point is to consider all the ecofriendly policies and green chemistry principles to follow decarbonization guidelines. This will not be an easy task, but efforts are being made to satisfy the technological transfer demands with low CO2 footprint materials synthesis and processes.

Given the relatively low efficiency of water splitting based on PC and PEC, these approaches should be integrated and adapted to suit specific needs, for instance for the decentralized production of H2. In this context, direct seawater splitting is a promising technology,[ 54 , 55 ] owing to the abundance and availability of seawater: about 71% of the Earth's surface is water‐covered, with saline water accounting for 96.5% of all the water available on Earth.[ 56 ] Moreover, 77% of all countries worldwide have direct access to seawater, a renewable resource that is constantly replenished by the natural water cycle. The use of seawater for the decentralized production of H2 could eliminate the need to use purified water, which is energy‐intensive to produce. Moreover, in the current scenario of water scarcity worldwide, purified, potable water is a critical commodity: about one‐in‐four people (≈2 billions) do not currently have access to clean water.[ 57 ] Unfortunately, this situation might worsen in the near future, due to the global warming and related climate change. Direct seawater splitting has the potential to be independent from energy‐intensive centralized desalination facilities, which should be prioritized toward the production of purified water for human consumption and use in agriculture. Therefore, direct seawater splitting could constitute a sustainable and readily available option for the de‐centralized, local generation of green H2, while avoiding competing with the production of potable water. Cheap and Earth‐abundant oxide‐based semiconducting light absorbers could be pivotal for this technology: the main advantage of direct PC/PEC seawater splitting is that it does not require external sources of electricity to sustain the electrolysis, as schematically reported in Figure 5 for a single junction device. Instead, the process is powered directly by sunlight, which is free, abundant (1.0 kW m−2 at AM1.5), and renewable. In addition, due to the high concentration of NaCl in seawater (≈0.5 mol L−1),[ 58 ] this process could provide chlorine gas as a side (anodic) product, a commodity used to disinfect water, for the sanitation of sewage and industrial waste, and for production of derived chemicals and polymers. This side production could add a significant contribution to the value chain of H2.

The aforementioned green H2 production methods face the common challenge of high energy costs required to split water. According to thermodynamics, the energy input required for this reaction is equivalent to an applied voltage of 1.23 V. However, in practice, a voltage of more than 1.7 V must be applied to overcome the sluggish kinetics of the oxygen evolution reaction (OER),[ 59 ] which is the bottleneck of water splitting. Even the most efficient OER electrocatalysts to date show significant overpotentials (up to 0.4 V),[ 59 ] which leads to a significant amount of energy being spent on producing oxygen, a product with low market value. As a result, the deployment of the green H2 production market is hindered: green H2 currently accounts for only 4% of the overall production worldwide, equivalent to 3.8 Mt in 2021.[ 6 ] Interestingly, this is in line with the amount of electricity produced worldwide using solar PV, accounting for 3.6% (179 TWh in 2021).[ 60 ] Therefore, boosting the large‐scale production of green H2 requires the parallel optimization and scale‐up of both solar PV and electrolyzers. Value‐added oxidation reactions are an attractive pathway to further reduce green H2 production costs by reducing energy consumption and adding market value.[ 59 ] In this class of reactions, electrolysis is performed in aqueous solutions containing biomass‐derived waste analogs such as glycerol or 5‐hydroxymethylfurfural (5‐HMF), which are used as efficient electron donors. Biomass electrolysis offers a potential solution to replace the sluggish OER at the anodic side of (photo)electrolyzers with the more favorable organic molecule oxidation, which could lead to a more efficient production process.[ 59 ] The H2 produced in this way is still considered “green” since biomass is recognized as a CO2‐neutral, abundant, and renewable substitute for fossil fuels.[ 61 ] Additionally, the rich proton content in most biomass building blocks makes it an effective H2 carrier.[ 59 ] Compared to water electrolysis, the electrolysis of biomass feedstock to generate H2 requires less theoretical electricity consumption, as previously reported[ 62 ] and as schematized in Figure 6a. Noteworthy, the theoretical operating voltage for a device performing biomass electrolysis could be as low as 0.5 V. From a PC/PEC point of view, this voltage could be achieved with the photovoltage generated by a double‐or even a single junction photoabsorber system, as reported in Figure 6b. This could constitute a net advantage over water electrolysis, since the higher operating voltages required to split water necessitate multiabsorber tandems connected in series to yield additive photovoltages. Furthermore, biomass oxidation offers the opportunity to produce value‐added chemicals, representing a highly efficient power‐to‐X (X = fuel and chemicals) conversion.[ 59 ] These combined aspects have the potential to produce green H2 at relatively low cost, adding further value by the generation of diverse chemical commodities. However, the practical implementation of this promising technology is subject to further investigation and consideration, particularly regarding the true kinetic overpotentials of these reactions and their dependence on reaction conditions, the cost and energy required for the purification of the oxidation products, and the market demand for such commodities.

Figure 6 A) Theoretical reaction kinetics controlled by the Butler–Volmer law for water splitting and the electrolysis involving biomass oxidation. For both cases the operating voltages have been determined for a current density of 1 A cm−2. Adapted from C. Lamy, C. Coutanceau, S. Baranton, Production of Clean Hydrogen by Electrochemical Reforming of Oxygenated Organic Compounds, Academic Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts 2020.[62] B) Photovoltage as a function of bandgap for selected semiconductors. The Shockley–Queisser (SQ) limit is also indicated. Adapted from Matthew T. Mayer, Photovoltage at semiconductor–electrolyte junctions, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2017, 2, 104–110 (themed issue on Solar Cells edited by Michael Grätzel). HER: Hydrogen Evolution Reaction; OER: Oxygen Evolution Reaction.

2.4 White Hydrogen

White H2, so called natural H2, is generated by a natural geochemical process deep inside the Earth's crust. This form of hydrogen production stands as the most cost‐effective method for producing carbon‐neutral H2 and is competitive with fossil fuels. In terms of its value chain, the processes involved mirror those employed in natural gas production, encompassing prospecting, site selection, drilling, extraction, and product separation. An important aspect to highlight is the utmost priority placed on environmental protection throughout the implementation of this solution. Notably, the extraction of natural H2 circumvents the need for contentious techniques like hydraulic fracturing, ensuring a sustainable and responsible approach.[ 63 , 64 ]

Among the most impressive advantages of this H2 family is that is generated constantly in the Earth's depths and its flux is estimated of 23 million ton of H2 per year from all geological sources. Additionally, one kilogram extraction prevents 7.7 kg of CO2, therefore the expected price is even cheaper than the steam methane reforming (grey) H2, currently in $2 kg−1.[ 63 , 64 ]

3 Hydrogen Transport

The existence of a transport and storage infrastructure for H2 could kickstart the consumption of H2 for all three types of consumers (in particular for mobility and the built environment). Up to this day, the amount of H2 consumed outside of industrial facilities is significantly low (mainly used as a reagent in research laboratories, in some captive medium‐duty vehicles (MDV) fleets, and the few available hydrogen refueling stations (HRS) worldwide before 2010). In this context, the development of the (trans)national H2 transport networks anywhere has not been felt by stakeholders in the H2 sector.

3.1 Transport of Hydrogen in the Existing Natural Gas Infrastructure

The most popular method of transporting H2 nowadays is via the use of tube trailers, which is merely a trailer that carries a bundle of tubes and supplies gases to a particular consumer. The main disadvantage of transporting H2 via tube trailers is the high cost of transported H2: a single tube trailer can only carry ≈400 kg of H2, and the limitation lies in the weight of the steel tubes used as well as in the maximum allowable storage pressure in tube trailers (250 bar in the U.S.).[ 65 ]

One of the proposals that has recently gained significant attention in the H2 world is to repurpose the existing natural gas transmission and distribution infrastructure. Transporting H2 in a network that has already been commissioned would bring significant advantages including 1) a short(er) time horizon for the development of a large‐scale H2 transport infrastructure, 2) significantly lower capital expenditures (CAPEX) of the transport system for H2, and 3) to bring freedom and certainty to stakeholders on both the consumption and production sides of H2, so that they can develop projects where they deem it best suited to their interests.

The retrofitting of the existing natural gas infrastructure to accommodate H2 comes with challenges of its own. As a first example, there could be competition with natural gas. The International Energy Agency (IEA) predicts that natural gas will continue to play a role in the global energy mix, both in the lead up to 2050 and potentially beyond.[ 66 ] This implies that H2 and natural gas could compete with one another for access to the transport infrastructure; in principle, this could be solved by physically blending H2 in the natural gas, albeit blending also comes with its own set of risks (increased flammability of the mixture compared to pure natural gas) and challenges.

Furthermore, compatibility of the natural gas infrastructure with H2 can also present a difficult challenge. The development of gas transport infrastructure was historically done in view of two types of gas to deliver: 1) the transport of “town gas,” i.e., gasified coal that consists of a mixture of carbon monoxide and H2, in urban settlements, and 2) the natural gas (either low caloric or high caloric) that holds little to no H2. As such, it is not expected that H2 would be compatible with the existing assets in the natural gas transport infrastructure, in particular looking at the transmission grid (in many countries it consists of large‐diameter pipelines with a nominal operating pressure upwards of 50 bar) and being mindful of pressure‐induced phenomena such as permeation, leaks, or hydrogen‐induced embrittlement.

There are several past and ongoing projects[ 67 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 ] to prove the extent to which the assets of the natural gas infrastructure can be reused for H2 or H2 blends and to which extent they would need to be replaced or maintained more often (both of which would result in increased H2 transport costs). Research in this topic has converged so far to the knowledge that the existing natural gas infrastructure can carry H2 blends up to 20–30% without serious modifications, while blending higher H2 percentages as well as carrying 100% H2 need more research.

3.2 Hydrogen Shipping and Hydrogen Carriers

Hydrogen transportation is a crucial component in establishing a global H2 economy. While pipeline transport is practical for short distances, the transportation of H2 across oceans is necessary for long distances. The development of H2 shipping using various carriers, including compressed gas, liquefied H2, and ammonia, presents an opportunity for countries to access clean energy sources that may not be available locally. However, several challenges need to be addressed, such as safety, cost‐effectiveness, and competition with existing supply chains.

This type of transportation is known as H2 shipping and can be accomplished using various H2 carriers (Table 2 ).[ 8 ]

Table 2 Hydrogen carriers with description, potential windfalls, and challenges

Hydrogen carrier	Description	Potential windfalls	Challenges	
Liquid hydrogen	H2 is liquefied and transported using tankers to an import terminal. From there, it is transported further inland either as a liquid or in a gaseous state.	The advantage of this approach is that the liquefied natural gas (LNG) trade is already established worldwide. Therefore, by learning from the existing LNG supply chain, the transportation of liquid H2 could be further developed.	The primary challenge of liquid H2 is boil‐off losses caused by imperfect insulation and quantum effects.	
Ammonia	H2 is used to synthesize ammonia but, instead of the ammonia becoming the feedstock for a further chemical process (e.g., in the production of fertilizers), ammonia is shipped to a reconversion terminal where H2 is extracted from the ammonia and used in gaseous form.	Shipping H2 as ammonia can benefit from the established worldwide ammonia trade.	While the Haber‐Bosch process to produce ammonia is well‐established, the reverse reaction to release H2 is still in the early stages of development. This suggests that it may take some time to develop this form of shipping.

Furthermore, ammonia has been reported as a particularly toxic compound for humans[ 72 ]

Another challenge is the potential competition with the current ammonia and ammonia‐derived supply chains, e.g., fertilizers. This suggests that using hydrogen as an energy carrier could potentially compete with food production.

	
Liquid organic hydrogen carrier (LOHC)	An unsaturated hydrocarbon (such as methyl cyclohexane, n‐ethyl carbazole, and dibenzyl toluene) is hydrogenated to form a saturated hydrocarbon (typically in liquid form), and is later transported to a reconversion terminal where it is dehydrogenated, and the residual liquid (i.e., an unsaturated hydrocarbon) is shipped back to the origin	The use of LOHC can benefit from the existing worldwide trade (in particular of toluene, the dehydrogenated form of methyl cyclohexane)

Unlike liquid H2, LOHCs can be stored in liquid form at ambient conditions and, unlike ammonia, LOHCs do not pose a particularly high threat to human health

	Whereas ammonia and liquid H2 are considered “one‐way carriers”, i.e., they get destroyed after extracting the H2, LOHCs are meant to be two‐way carriers, meaning that the dehydrogenated liquid will be shipped back to the port of origin for re‐hydrogenation. This means that LOHCs are probably more suitable for short distance transport, e.g., between the mainland and an island, instead of being an optimal candidate for transoceanic trade.

Both the de‐ and the hydrogenation of LOHCs processes are not currently done at a large scale in the world and are currently at a developmental stage, meaning that LOHC could come to the market later than the alternative H2 carriers

	
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Table 2 is not exhaustive. There are other H2 carriers at various development stages (such as methanol, alkali borohydrides, and metal hydrides),[ 73 ] however, the three H2 carriers previously discussed are the most often mentioned in the H2 community.

In summary, the benefits of establishing a global H2 economy, including reducing greenhouse gas emissions, enhancing energy security, and fostering international collaboration, outweigh the challenges and make the development of H2 transportation a priority for a sustainable future.

4 Hydrogen Storage

An important component of the supply chains of fossil fuels is the storage facilities. This is particularly relevant for gaseous fuels such as natural gas, where large‐scale storage requires large volumes that can only be found underground. Storage of energy carriers is vital to the social acceptance, immediate implementation, and economy inclusion. It is also the primary method of coping with the fluctuations in supply and demand. One of the causes of the spike in the natural gas price at the end of 2021 was indeed the depletion of the European gas reservoirs that were put under stress by the decreased natural gas supply from abroad, namely Russia.

Underground storage of H2 can be done in a similar fashion as the underground storage of natural gas, i.e., in salt caverns. Salt caverns are synthetic subsurface structures that are developed by “washing” away salt from an underground salt deposit until a hollow structure is formed. A salt cavern has a maximum depth of 2000 m, a volume of 1 000 000 m3, a height ranging from 300 to 500 m, and a diameter between 50 and 100 m. These dimensions enable substantial storage capacity within a pressure range of 30 to 80% of the lithostatic pressure. Nevertheless, when a well‐designed cavern is constructed, salt deformation can still arise at depths exceeding 2000 m as a result of elevated pressure and temperature.[ 74 ] Salt caverns offer the most promising underground storage option due to the large sealing capacity of rock salt, its inert nature, as well as their flexibility toward injection/withdrawal cycles.[ 75 , 76 ] For further details on operational storage conditions, which depends on the cavern dimensions, refer to the review of Muhammed et al.[ 74 ]

Although salt deposits are not commonplaces in the world, they are not particularly rare, either: there is a significant amount of salt deposits spread throughout Europe (Figure 7 ). It is estimated that the total on‐ and off‐shore European H2 storage potential is 84.8 PWhH2,[ 75 ] which represents more than 8 times of the total final energy consumption in Europe in 2020.[ 77 ] This reinforces the potential to store significant amounts of H2 in Europe, enough to cover a potential surge in demand in the coming decades.

Figure 7 Salt structures localized along Europe. Reproduced with permission.[ 75 ] Copyright 2020, Elsevier.

The investigation of underground H2 storage is currently underway in various regions of the world. However, this research is at an earlier stage compared to other aspects of the H2 value chain. Consequently, the deployment of large‐scale H2 storage may take more time. Nevertheless, an appealing underground H2 storage is the H2 project at Teesside, UK.[ 78 ] British Petroleum and stakeholders aimed at creating the United Kingdom's first fully integrated H2 production and CCUS hub. The Teesside project aims to lower the industrial cluster's carbon footprint by generating blue H2 from natural gas, capturing the CO2, and storing it offshore. The initiative also has economic benefits and supports the UK's net‐zero emissions target.

Another clear example for the same effort is the HyStock project at Zuidwending, the Netherlands.[ 79 ] This project particularly will investigate the effect of salt cavern storage on the purity of H2 and the technical feasibility (especially in safety aspects) of salt cavern storage for H2.

Meanwhile, the storage of H2 in salt caverns is already implemented on a large industrial scale, its applicability is limited in certain regions due to differing geological conditions. Thus, another storage technologies are necessary for worldwide implementation. Among the developed technologies, H2 storage can be classified into two groups based on its physical state: gaseous or liquid. Additionally, H2 storage methods can be further categorized as either adsorption, which occurs on the surfaces of solids, or absorption, which takes place within solids. The common physical storage methods are compressed gas, cold/cryo compressed gas, and liquid H2. Whilst the materials‐based methods are adsorbent, liquid organic, hydride (interstitial or in complex), and chemical H2.[ 80 , 81 ] One emerging H2 storage form is applying high pressure and preserving the room temperature, several studies have been reported.[ 82 ]

5 Hydrogen Consumption

The consumption of H2 to produce either (mechanical) work or heat is an important step of the value chain. Although the consumption of H2 has been generally associated with the operation of fuel cells, H2 can also be burned as any other gaseous fuel to produce heat in a boiler or stovetop as well as combustion engines for cars. H2 consumption is generally divided into the types of end‐users: Industry

Mobility

Built environment

5.1 Hydrogen in Industry

Interestingly, according to IEA, industry is the second‐largest global source of CO2 emissions (related to the energy sector, after the combustion of fossil fuels), exceeding 8.4 Gt in 2020.[ 83 ] In particular, three heavy industries, i.e., chemicals (production of primary chemicals, i.e., ethylene, propylene, benzene, toluene, ammonia, and methanol), steel, and cement, account for nearly 60% of all energy consumption and about 72% of all the industrial CO2 emissions.[ 66 ]

Electrifying industry has been a viable option for years, but it has two challenges. First, the cost of electricity per unit energy (MWh) is higher than fossil fuels, making it less appealing for businesses. Second, industrialized countries such as Germany, Poland, the US, and the Netherlands produce electricity with high carbon intensity (>300 g CO2 kWh−1),[ 84 ] making electrification ineffective in reducing industry's carbon footprint.

In densely populated countries like the Netherlands, the electricity grid is near its maximum transport capacity, causing congestion problems. Large off‐takers and electricity producers joining the network without a planned expansion worsen the situation. Hence, H2 is seen as a potential substitute for electrification. In industry, there are two primary methods for utilizing H2. The first is to generate heat, primarily high‐temperature heat. The second is to use it as a chemical reagent in processes such as the Haber–Bosch process for obtaining ammonia.

If heat is the main input needed by a particular industry, then in principle H2 can directly substitute fossil fuels such as natural gas and coal. However, current developments have pointed to potential challenges about the combustion of H2: Handling H2 safely requires additional attention compared to gaseous fossil fuels such as natural gas. It is necessary to ensure that the safety standards for handling H2 are at least as high as those for natural gas.

Since the flame temperature of H2 (2180–2210 °C) is higher than that of natural gas (1930–1960 °C),[ 85 ] there is a growing concern that burning H2 can lead to an increase in (mainly thermal) NOx emissions as a result of the increased flame temperature. In this case, current developments in combustion technology and burner design are underway to solve this problem.

As mentioned before, H2 can also be used as feedstock, i.e., as a chemical reagent to take part in the Haber–Bosch process to produce ammonia (4) 3H2+N2→2NH3

Using H2 to produce ammonia is a well‐established process. However, it has a disadvantage—H2 can also be obtained from natural gas through SMR.[ 86 ] As a result, substituting H2 in ammonia plants is primarily a cost optimization challenge.

H2 can be feedstock within the production of steel,[ 87 , 88 , 89 ] namely the direct reduction of iron (5) 3Fe2O3+9H2→6Fe+9H2O

In a steel production,[ 87 , 88 , 89 ] the challenge is exacerbated by the existing flexibility in the current steel manufacturing processes: iron can be reduced not only with H2 but also with CO, involving other types of possibly more polluting fuels such as coke‐oven gas, refinery bottoms, coal, and pet coke, which can be used in the process. Eventually, the introduction of H2 to the industry will largely depend on its price, which will be influenced by many parameters, among them the costs of its transportation and production.

5.2 Hydrogen in Mobility

Mobility has been the most discussed application of H2 in the past decades. Since the surge in interest by US‐based car manufacturers to develop H2 cars in the 1990s, H2 has ever since been promoted as a substitute for gasoline and diesel (and to a lesser extent, for liquefied petroleum gas, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), and liquefied natural gas (LNG). As is the case for industrial end‐users looking for a substitute to fossil‐fuel combustion, H2 could be used in an internal combustion engine (ICE), although the vehicle would probably need to be adjusted to the H2 consumption. The other main applications for extracting energy from H2 are PEM fuel cells, considered mainly due to their higher efficiency (≈50%) with respect to internal combustions (ICEs) (≈30%); the operation of PEM fuel cells has already been extensively covered in the literature.[ 90 ] There are several kinds of mobility applications including light‐duty vehicles (LDVs) (light‐duty vehicles, i.e., passenger cars), medium‐duty vehicles (MDVs) (e.g., vans, public transport buses), and heavy‐duty vehicles (HDVs) like long‐haul trucks and coaches.

Regarding LDVs, fuel cell vehicles have existed in the market for longer than a decade, with Japanese and Korean car manufacturers being the most prominent in the market. The main challenge with respect to LDVs is the availability of HRSs, although the current support for hydrogen‐based mobility has accelerated the HRS market, from 330 stations available in 2017 to 540 in 2020.[ 91 ] Besides the infrastructure availability, the cost of the LDVs fuel cell and H2 as fuel are considered a challenge to be overcome by the development of both suitable transport and storage infrastructure. Undeniably, the governmental policies aimed at abating carbon emissions in mobility are of great importance, too.

The requirements for introducing H2 for powering MDVs and HDVs are similar to LDVs, although these vehicles present challenges (in particular for HDVs) due to the more stringent operational requirements with respect to LDVs. For example, while an average LDV might drive ≈20.000 km per year, a long‐haul truck drives at least three times more (≈60.000 km year−1) and the overall number of kilometers driven with an HDV before decommissioning is significantly higher than for an LDV. The increased lifetime and operating hours of an HDV mean that the current generation of PEM fuel cells (that were perfected for LDVs as it was the primary driver for their development) cannot follow the more stringent requirements for HDVs (and some MDVs as well). In this context, there are current efforts by companies such as Hyundai, Toyota, and Nikola that seem to bridge these constraints by developing next‐generation PEM fuel cells for heavy duty mobility.

5.3 Hydrogen in the Built Environment

The built environment, which comprises households and commercial buildings, is one of the worldwide largest carbon emitters. The Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency reported in 2019 that the building sector emitted 12% (23.3 MtCO2 year−1) of the total CO2 emissions at the national level.[ 92 ] Worldwide, almost 24% of the GHG emission is due to the energy production and consumption for the built environment.[ 93 ]

Fossil fuels consumption within the built environment is primarily from cooking, i.e., in stovetops and ovens, or in boiler/heat exchangers to produce space heating and warm water. The challenges for introducing H2 into the built environment can be divided in two main categories: The social acceptance, where the discussion of safety is centerpiece.

A robust transport infrastructure to supply households and commercial buildings.

The consumption of H2 in the built environment could be technologically feasible in time to come. Boilers and burners could be directly switched over from natural gas to H2 with only the addition of a safety device, meant to control the H2 flow to the end‐user in case of failure or leak.[ 94 ]

6 A Strategic Roadmap on Hydrogen Value Chain

This review provides a comprehensive overview of the key steps and components involved in the value chain of H2 production, transportation, and storage, which are essential for the transition to a sustainable energy future. This section aims to offer a concise summary of the main elements within each step, highlighting the significance of H2 as a promising noncarbonized fuel.

H2 production is gaining momentum due to its role in decarbonizing energy production, providing a sustainable alternative to fossil fuels, and addressing the need for cost‐effective energy storage. There are three leading types of H2 production: grey H2, which is produced from fossil fuels and has a high carbon intensity; blue H2, which includes carbon capture and storage/utilization; and green H2, which is produced using water and renewable energy sources. While grey H2 is currently the most widely used method, green H2 holds promise for the future, but large‐scale electrolyzer manufacturing capacity needs to be developed. One can comment on white H2 as perhaps as appealing than green, since its naturally available and the extraction steps are available due to other existent gases infrastructure.

Establishing a transport and storage infrastructure for H2 is crucial to promote its consumption, especially in sectors like mobility and the built environment. Repurposing existing natural gas infrastructure can provide advantages such as shorter development time, lower CAPEX, and freedom for stakeholders. However, challenges include competition with natural gas, compatibility issues, and the need for further research on blending H2 in the natural gas network. For long‐distance transportation, H2 shipping using carriers like liquid H2, ammonia, and LOHCs presents opportunities but requires addressing safety, cost‐effectiveness, and competition with existing supply chains. Despite challenges, developing H2 transportation is a priority for a sustainable future due to its potential benefits.

Storage facilities are essential for the supply chains of fossil fuels, particularly for gaseous fuels like natural gas, which require large volumes that can only be stored underground. Salt caverns offer a promising option for underground storage of H2, as they provide large sealing capacity and flexibility for injection and withdrawal cycles. Europe has significant salt deposits, offering the potential to store substantial amounts of H2 to meet future demand. Research on underground H2 storage is ongoing, with projects like the Teesside hub in the UK and the HyStock project in the Netherlands exploring the feasibility and benefits of salt cavern storage. One cannot exclude the storage methods at room temperature and high pressures.

H2 consumption plays a crucial role in various sectors, including industry, mobility, and the built environment. In the industrial sector, H2 can be used as a substitute for fossil fuels in processes requiring heat or as a chemical reagent in reactions such as the production of ammonia and steel. In the mobility sector, H2 has been explored as an alternative to gasoline and diesel, either through adjustments to internal combustion engines or by using PEM fuel cells. In the built environment, H2 has the potential to replace fossil fuels for cooking and heating purposes, but challenges remain in terms of social acceptance and establishing a reliable transport infrastructure for H2 supply.

7 Conclusions

In order to attain the energy transition, value chain, technoeconomic studies, and life cycle assessment are key tools to develop and implement synergistically evolving technologies, such as green and white H2. Such technologies must be developed with productivity and stability as indicators. At the same time, development of H2 technologies should surpass their technical challenges to be able to provide reliable and competent prototype, ready and safe for the end‐user. One of the major challenges is to lower the levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH) to $2 kg−1 to become competitive with fossil sources. Moreover, the performance of the present state‐of‐the‐art green H2 production is below par behind the 10% efficiency requirements set by industry. Therefore, extensive works are urgently required to move forward the advancement of renewable energy technologies, specifically the development of large‐scale electrolyzer manufacturing capacity.

In storage options regard, such as salt caverns and physical or materials‐based methods, are being explored to meet future H2 demand. The review acknowledges the importance of establishing a transport infrastructure for H2 consumption in sectors like mobility and the built environment, addressing challenges related to competition with natural gas and compatibility. It also highlights opportunities and considerations for long‐distance H2 transportation using liquid H2, ammonia, and LOHCs as carriers. Furthermore, the review emphasizes H2’s crucial role in industry, mobility, and the built environment, potentially replacing fossil fuels for heating and cooking. However, challenges remain in terms of social acceptance and establishing a reliable H2 transport infrastructure.

Conflict of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Acknowledgements

P.J.‐C. thanks Prof. Antonietti for scientific and management guidance. Max Planck Society is acknowledged for its financial support. P.J.‐C. received funding from the European Union's Horizon Europe research and innovation program under the Marie Skłodowska‐Curie Grant Agreement No: 101068996 for his fellowship. M.F. acknowledges the CatLab project funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF, Förderkennzeichen 03EW0015A), for which a sustainable production and use of hydrogen is a core goal.

Open access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.

Julio César García‐Navarro is a professional with over 10 years of experience in the hydrogen technology industry. He has a master's degree in Sustainable Energy Technology from TUDelft (NL) and a Ph.D. in Electrochemistry from the University of Stuttgart (DE). He was a researcher at the German Aerospace Center (DLR) where he studied PEM electrolyzers. Afterwards he moved on to research electrochemical hydrogen compression and purification technologies at HyET Hydrogen (NL). He works now as Program Manager Hydrogen at the New Energy Coalition (NL), where he develops strategic research and innovation programs related to hydrogen and hydrogen technologies.

Mark Isaacs graduated with an MChem from Cardiff University in 2010, before undertaking a Ph.D. with Profs Adam Lee and Karen Wilson in the development of silver‐based nanocomposites for antibacterial applications. He moved to Aston university as a PDRA in 2014, developing hierarchically porous catalysts for domino or cascade reactions, before joining University College London and HarwellXPS in 2018. His research interests include developing composite oxide porous materials and the study of nanomaterial formation by XPS and related surface analysis techniques. He is the chair for the Society of Chemical Industry's early career materials science committee.

Marco Favaro is the deputy head of the Institute for Solar Fuels at the Helmholtz Zentrum Berlin (HZB), Germany. After his studies in Chemistry and Physics at the University of Padua (Italy), concluded in 2014, he spent two years as a postdoctoral fellow at the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis in Berkeley, USA, in the group of Dr. Junko Yano. He moved to Germany in 2017 to join the HZB. Here, his research activity focuses on understanding electronic‐structural properties/performance interplay in photoelectrocatalysts by operando multimodal spectroelectrochemical investigations with advanced synchrotron‐based in situ/operando.

Dan Ren is currently a tenure‐track professor at Xi'an Jiaotong University. He completed his undergraduate study in the Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2013 and his graduate research in the National University of Singapore in 2017. During 2018–2021, he worked as a postdoc with Prof. Michael Grätzel in the Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, where he served as the leader of “solar fuel” research group. He is working on electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide and his current research focuses on the physical chemistry of electrocatalytic interfaces. More about his information could be found at: https://gr.xjtu.edu.cn/en/web/dan.ren/

Wee‐Jun Ong received his B.Eng. and Ph.D. in chemical engineering from Monash University. He is an Associate Professor and Assistant Dean in School of Energy and Chemical Engineering at Xiamen University Malaysia. Starting from 2021, he serves as Director of Center of Excellence for NaNo Energy & Catalysis Technology (CONNECT). Previously, he was a scientist at Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore. In 2019, he was a visiting scientist at Technische Universität Dresden and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. His research interests include nanomaterials for photo(electro)catalytic H2O splitting, CO2 reduction, alcohol oxidation, and N2 fixation. For details, refer to https://sites.google.com/site/wjongresearch/

Michael Grätzel is a Professor at EPFL where he develops photosystems for the generation of electricity and chemical fuels from sunlight. Michael graduated from the Technical University Berlin and was a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Notre Dame before joining the EPFL as a professor of physical chemistry. There, he started his groundbreaking investigations on colloidal semiconductors, which generated several new research fronts worldwide. Michael is well known for his discovery of mesoscopic dye sensitized solar cells, which in turn prompted the rise of perovskite solar cells triggering a second revolution in photovoltaics. Michael's pioneering work was recognized by a number of awards. He is a member of several learned societies and received 12 honorary doctor degrees from European and Asian Universities. His over 1800 publications had a major impact on the photovoltaic field. A recent bibliometric ranking by Stanford University places Michael first amongst 100’000 world‐wide leading scientists across all areas of science. According to the Web of Science (2022), he is currently the most highly cited chemist in the world. For details, refer to https://www.epfl.ch/labs/lpi/graetzel/

Pablo Jiménez‐Calvo is a MSCA Postdoctoral researcher at the Friedrich‐Alexander‐Universität Erlangen‐Nürnberg, Germany. He received his PhD in Materials Chemistry and Physics from the University of Strasbourg, France in 2019 (Dr. Keller's lab). After two postdoctoral fellowships in Laboratoire Physique des Solides from the Université Paris Saclay (Dr. Paineau's lab, Orsay, France) and in the Max‐Planck‐Institut für kolloid‐ und Grenzflächenforschung (Prof. Antonietti's lab, Potsdam, Germany), he was awarded the prestigious MSCA. His research concerns carbon nitrides nanomaterials for photoelectrocatalysis on H2O splitting. He published 12 articles, 1 book chapter, and over 30 oral communications. In 2020 he was finalist for the European Young Chemists’ Award.
==== Refs
1 I. F. Teixeira , P. Jiménez‐Calvo , Renewable Energy Production and Distribution, Vol. 2 , Academic Press, Cambridge, MA 2023, pp. 145–180.
2 T. M. L. Wigley , Clim. Change 2018, 147 , 31.
3 M. Isaacs , J. Garcia‐Navarro , W.‐J. Ong , P. Jiménez‐Calvo , Glob. Challenges 2022, 2200165.
4 T. Ü. V. SÜD , Safety and efficiency along the complete hydrogen value chain, https://www.tuvsud.com/en/themes/hydrogen/explore‐the‐hydrogen‐value‐chain, (accessed: June 2022).
5 International Energy Agency (IEA), Hydrogen – Analysis – IEA, https://www.iea.org/reports/hydrogen, (accessed: March 2023).
6 E. Taibi , R. Miranda , W. Vanhoudt , T. Winkel , J.‐C. Lanoix , F. Barth , 2018. https://www.irena.org/-/media/files/irena/agency/publication/2018/sep/irena_hydrogen_from_renewable_power_2018.pdf
7 G. Franchi , M. Capocelli , M. De Falco , V. Piemonte , D. Barba , Membrane 2020, 10 , 10.
8 J. J. Lamb , M. Hillestad , E. Rytter , R. Bock , A. S. R. Nordgård , K. M. Lien , O. S. Burheim , B. G. Pollet , In Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Primers, Hydrogen, Biomass and Bioenergy (EDs: J. J. Lamb , B. G. Pollet ), Academic Press, UK, 2020.
9 A. I. Osman , M. Hefny , M. I. A. Abdel Maksoud , A. M. Elgarahy , D. W. Rooney , Environ. Chem. Lett. 2020, 19 , 797.
10 P. Madejski , K. Chmiel , N. Subramanian , T. Kuś , Energies 2022, 15 , 887.
11 R. Long‐Innes , H. Struchtrup , Cell Rep. 2022, 3 , 100791.
12 K. Han , C. K. Ahn , M. S. Lee , C. H. Rhee , J. Y. Kim , H. D. Chun , Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control 2013, 14 , 270.
13 F. Raganati , F. Miccio , P. Ammendola , Energy Fuels 2021, 35 , 12845.
14 R. Maniarasu , S. K. Rathore , S. Murugan , 2022, 10.1177/0958305x221093465.
15 N. Cihan , G. Bharath , A. K. Nadda , O. YukselOrhan , Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control 2021, 111 , 103465.
16 J. Love , Biochem. Soc. Trans. 2022, 50 , 987.35411379
17 W. Liu , Y. Cai , M. Luo , Y. Yang , P. Li , Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2022, 61 , 2882.
18 A. Rybak , A. Rybak , S. Boncel , A. Kolanowska , W. Kaszuwara , S. D. Kolev , RSC Adv. 2022, 12 , 13367.35520128
19 J. Garcia‐Navarro , What is CCUS? – How Carbon Capture plays a role in the hydrogen economy – Hydrogen Central, https://hydrogen‐central.com/what‐is‐ccus‐carbon‐capture‐hydrogen‐economy/, 2021.
20 X. Chen , C. Li , M. Grätzel , R. Kostecki , S. S. Mao , Chem. Soc. Rev. 2012, 41 , 7909.22990530
21 M. Grätzel , Nature 2001, 414 , 338.11713540
22 J. Gao , F. Sahli , C. Liu , D. Ren , X. Guo , J. Werner , Q. Jeangros , S. M. Zakeeruddin , C. Ballif , M. Grätzel , J. Luo , Joule 2019, 3 , 2930.
23 A. Al‐Ashouri , E. Köhnen , B. Li , A. Magomedov , H. Hempel , P. Caprioglio , J. A. Márquez , A. B. M. Vilches , E. Kasparavicius , J. A. Smith , N. Phung , D. Menzel , M. Grischek , L. Kegelmann , D. Skroblin , C. Gollwitzer , T. Malinauskas , M. Jošt , G. Matič , B. Rech , R. Schlatmann , M. Topič , L. Korte , A. Abate , B. Stannowski , D. Neher , M. Stolterfoht , T. Unold , V. Getautis , S. Albrecht , Science 2020, 370 , 1300.33303611
24 National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Best Research‐Cell Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell‐efficiency.html, (accessed: April 2023).
25 M. Favaro , W. S. Drisdell , M. A. Marcus , J. M. Gregoire , E. J. Crumlin , J. A. Haber , J. Yano , ACS Catal. 2017, 7 , 1248.
26 J. Yang , J. K. Cooper , F. M. Toma , K. A. Walczak , M. Favaro , J. W. Beeman , L. H. Hess , C. Wang , C. Zhu , S. Gul , J. Yano , C. Kisielowski , A. Schwartzberg , I. D. Sharp , Nat. Mater. 2016, 16 , 335.27820814
27 2000 ASTM Standard Extraterrestrial Spectrum Reference E‐490‐00 | Grid Modernization | NREL, https://www.nrel.gov/grid/solar‐resource/spectra‐astm‐e490.html, n.d.
28 National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Reference Air Mass 1.5 Spectra | Grid Modernization | NREL, https://www.nrel.gov/grid/solar‐resource/spectra‐am1.5.html, n.d.
29 J. W. Ager , M. R. Shaner , K. A. Walczak , I. D. Sharp , S. Ardo , Energy Environ. Sci. 2015, 8 , 2811.
30 C. C. L. McCrory , S. Jung , I. M. Ferrer , S. M. Chatman , J. C. Peters , T. F. Jaramillo , J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137 , 4347.25668483
31 M. Bodner , A. Hofer , V. Hacker , Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Energy Environ. 2015, 4 , 365.
32 E. Commission , Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030 – Bringing Nature Back into Our Lives, Brussels, 2020.
33 International Energy Agency, Global electrolysis capacity becoming operational annually, 2014–2023, historical and announced, https://www.iea.org/data‐and‐statistics/charts/global‐electrolysis‐capacity‐becoming‐operational‐annually‐2014‐2023‐historical‐and‐announced, 2022.
34 P. I. Jiménez‐Calvo , Université de Strasbourg, 2019.
35 K. Masao , I. Okura , Photocatalysis: Science and Technology, Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, 2002.
36 A. Fujishima , K. Honda , Nature 1972, 238 , 37.12635268
37 P. Jiménez‐Calvo , V. Caps , V. Keller , Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev. 2021, 149 , 111095.
38 J. Li , P. Jiménez‐Calvo , E. Paineau , M. N. Ghazzal , Catalysts 2020, 10 , 89.
39 R. Marschall , Adv. Funct. Mater. 2014, 24 , 2421.
40 L. Schumacher , R. Marschall , Top Curr. Chem. 2022, 380 , 53.
41 P. Jiménez‐Calvo , C. Marchal , T. Cottineau , V. Caps , V. Keller , J. Mater. Chem. A 2019, 7 , 14849.
42 P. Jiménez‐Calvo , V. Caps , M. N. Ghazzal , C. Colbeau‐Justin , V. Keller , Nano Energy 2020, 75 , 104888.
43 H. El Marouazi , P. Jiménez‐Calvo , E. Breniaux , C. Colbeau‐Justin , I. Janowska , V. Keller , ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2021, 9 , 3633.
44 X. Wang , K. Maeda , A. Thomas , K. Takanabe , G. Xin , J. M. Carlsson , K. Domen , M. Antonietti , Nat. Mater. 2009, 8 , 76.18997776
45 I. F. Teixeira , N. V. Tarakina , I. F. Silva , N. López‐Salas , A. Savateev , M. Antonietti , Adv. Sustainable Syst. 2022, 2100429.
46 P. Jimenéz‐Calvo , A. Sobolewska , M. Isaacs , Y. Zhang , A. Leforestier , J. Degrouard , S. Rouzière , C. Goldmann , D. Vantelon , P. Launois , M. N. Ghazzal , E. Paineau , ChemRXiv 2023, 10.26434/CHEMRXIV-2023-QCXSH.
47 P. Jiménez‐Calvo , L. Michel , V. Keller , V. Caps , ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2021, 13 , 61015.34918899
48 K. Sivula , R. van de Krol , Nat. Rev. Mater. 2016, 1 , 15010.
49 J. H. Kim , J. W. Jang , Y. H. Jo , F. F. Abdi , Y. H. Lee , R. van de Krol , J. S. Lee , Nat. Commun. 2016, 7 , 13380.27966548
50 M. Jerigova , Y. Markushyna , I. F. Teixeira , B. Badamdorj , M. Isaacs , D. Cruz , I. Lauermann , M. Á. Muñoz‐Márquez , N. V. Tarakina , N. López‐Salas , O. Savateev , P. Jimenéz‐Calvo , Adv. Sci. 2023, 10 , 2300099.
51 W.‐J. Ong , L.‐L. Tan , Y. H. Ng , S.‐T. Yong , S.‐P. Chai , Chem. Rev. 2016, 116 , 7159.27199146
52 P. Jimenéz‐Calvo , M. J. Muñoz‐Batista , M. Isaacs , V. Ramnarain , D. Ihiawakrim , X. Li , M. Ángel Muñoz‐Márquez , G. Teobaldi , M. Kociak , E. Paineau , Chem. Eng. J. 2023, 459 , 141514.
53 A. Galushchinskiy , R. González‐Gómez , K. McCarthy , P. Farràs , A. Savateev , Energy Fuels 2022, 36 , 4625.35558990
54 D. H. Marin , J. T. Perryman , M. A. Hubert , G. A. Lindquist , L. Chen , A. M. Aleman , G. A. Kamat , V. A. Niemann , M. B. Stevens , Y. N. Regmi , S. W. Boettcher , A. C. Nielander , T. F. Jaramillo , Joule 2023, 7 , 765.
55 P. Farràs , P. Strasser , A. J. Cowan , Joule 2021, 5 , 1921.
56 Water Science School | U.S. Geological Survey, https://www.usgs.gov/special‐topics/water‐science‐school, (accessed: March 2023).
57 H. Ritchie , M. Roser , Our World Data 2021.
58 S. Dresp , F. Dionigi , M. Klingenhof , P. Strasser , ACS Energy Lett. 2019, 4 , 933.
59 H. Luo , J. Barrio , N. Sunny , A. Li , L. Steier , N. Shah , I. E. L. Stephens , M. M. Titirici , Adv. Energy Mater. 2021, 11 , 2101180.
60 International Energy Agency (IEA), P. Bojek, Solar PV – Analysis, https://www.iea.org/reports/solar‐pv, (accessed: March 2023).
61 Y. Li , W. Liu , Z. Zhang , X. Du , L. Yu , Y. Deng , Commun Chem 2019, 2 , 67.
62 C. Lamy , C. Coutanceau , S. Baranton , Production of Clean Hydrogen by Electrochemical Reforming of Oxygenated Organic Compounds, Academic Press, Cambridge, MA 2019, p. 1.
63 A. Prinzhofer , I. Moretti , J. Françolin , C. Pacheco , A. D'Agostino , J. Werly , F. Rupin , Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2019, 44 , 5676.
64 V. Zgonnik , Earth‐Sci. Rev. 2020, 203 , 103140.
65 U.S. Department of Energy, “Hydrogen Tube Trailers”, https://www.energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/hydrogen‐tube‐trailers, (accessed: June 2020).
66 International Energy Agency, Net Zero by 2050 A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector, 2021.
67 National Gas, FutureGrid, https://www.nationalgas.com/insight‐and‐innovation/transmission‐innovation/futuregrid, (accessed: March 2023).
68 U.S. Department of Energy, HyBlend: Opportunities for Hydrogen Blending in Natural Gas Pipelines, https://www.energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/hyblend‐opportunities‐hydrogen‐blending‐natural‐gas‐pipelines, (accessed: March 2023).
69 Hy4Heat, Hy4Heat: A programme of work to investigate the practicalities of using hydrogen for heat in UK homes and businesses, https://www.hy4heat.info/, (accessed: March 2023).
70 H21 Programme , H21 North of England: A Gas Network for the 21st Century, https://h21.green/, (accessed: March 2023).
71 The HIGGS project, Higgs: Hydrogen Implementation Guidelines for Gas Systems, https://higgsproject.eu/, (accessed: March 2023).
72 Ammonia Poisoning | Environmental Pollution Centers, https://www.environmentalpollutioncenters.org/ammonia/, (accessed: March 2023).
73 A. Züttel , A. Remhof , A. Borgschulte , O. Friedrichs , Philos. Trans. A: Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 2010, 368 , 3329.20566514
74 N. S. Muhammed , B. Haq , D. Al Shehri , A. Al‐Ahmed , M. M. Rahman , E. Zaman , Energy Rep. 2022, 8 , 461.
75 D. G. Caglayan , N. Weber , H. U. Heinrichs , J. Linßen , M. Robinius , P. A. Kukla , D. Stolten , Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2020, 45 , 6793.
76 D. Stolten , B. Emonts , Hydrogen Science and Engineering: Materials, Processes, Systems and Technology, Wiley‐VCH Verlag, Weinheim, Germany 2016.
77 Eurostat, Energy statistics – an overview – Statistics Explained, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics‐explained/index.php?title=Energy_statistics_‐_an_overview#Final_energy_consumption, (accessed: October 2022).
78 British Petroleum, H2Teesside UK project, https://www.bp.com/en_gb/united‐kingdom/home/where‐we‐operate/reimagining‐teesside.html, (accessed: October 2022).
79 G. Company , HyStock – power to hydrogen, https://www.hystock.nl/, (accessed: October 2022).
80 J. Andersson , S. Grönkvist , Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2019, 44 , 11901.
81 Hydrogen Storage | Department of Energy, https://www.energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/hydrogen‐storage, n.d.
82 M. Felderhoff , C. Weidenthaler , R. Von Helmolt , U. Eberle , Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2007, 9 , 2643.17627309
83 (IEA) International Energy Agency, Global Hydrogen Review, https://www.iea.org/reports/hydrogen, (accessed: July 2022).
84 Electricity Maps | Live 24/7 CO₂ emissions of electricity consumption, https://app.electricitymaps.com/map, (accessed: July 2022).
85 I. Glassman , Combustion, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987.
86 M. Steinberg , H. C. Cheng , Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 1989, 14 , 797.
87 I. R. Souza Filho , H. Springer , Y. Ma , A. Mahajan , C. C. da Silva , M. Kulse , D. Raabe , J. Clean Prod. 2022, 340 , 130805.
88 I. R. Souza Filho , Y. Ma , M. Kulse , D. Ponge , B. Gault , H. Springer , D. Raabe , Acta Mater. 2021, 213 , 116971.
89 S. H. Kim , X. Zhang , Y. Ma , I. R. Souza Filho , K. Schweinar , K. Angenendt , D. Vogel , L. T. Stephenson , A. A. El‐Zoka , J. R. Mianroodi , M. Rohwerder , B. Gault , D. Raabe , Acta Mater. 2021, 212 , 116933.
90 M. A. Pellow , C. J. M. Emmott , C. J. Barnhart , S. M. Benson , Energy Environ. Sci. 2015, 8 , 1938.
91 Global Hydrogen Fueling Station Market Outlook to 2027, https://www.blackridgeresearch.com/reports/global‐hydrogen‐refueling‐stations‐hrs‐market, (accessed: October 2022).
92 P. O. for the, L. Environment, Climate and Energy Outlook 2020, 2020 .
93 CO₂ and, Greenhouse Gas Emissions – Our World in Data, https://ourworldindata.org/co2‐and‐greenhouse‐gas‐emissions, (accessed: October 2022).
94 THyGA | Testing Hydrogen admixture for Gas Applications, https://thyga‐project.eu/, (accessed: October 2022).
95 K. Zhang , X. Liang , L. Wang , K. Sun , Y. Wang , Z. Xie , Q. Wu , X. Bai , M. S. Hamdy , H. Chen , X. Zou , Nano Res. Energy 2022, 1 , e9120032.
