
==== Front
Imeta
Imeta
10.1002/(ISSN)2770-596X
IMT2
iMeta
2770-5986
2770-596X
John Wiley and Sons Inc. Hoboken

10.1002/imt2.167
IMT2167
Review Article
Review Articles
Intestinal flora and pregnancy complications: Current insights and future prospects
INTESTINAL FLORA IN PREGNANCY COMPLICATIONS
TIAN et al.
Tian Zhenyu http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0385-1460
1
Zhang Xinjie 2
Yao Guixiang 1
Jin Jiajia 1
Zhang Tongxue 1
Sun Chunhua 3
Wang Zhe 4
Zhang Qunye http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1535-9182
1 5 wz.zhangqy@sdu.edu.cn

1 National Key Laboratory for Innovation and Transformation of Luobing Theory; The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese Ministry of Education, Chinese National Health Commission and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences; Department of Cardiology Qilu Hospital of Shandong University Jinan China
2 Department of Biology University College London London UK
3 Department of Health Management Center, Qilu Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine Shandong University Jinan China
4 Department of Geriatrics Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong First Medical University Jinan China
5 Cardiovascular Disease Research Center of Shandong First Medical University Central Hospital Affiliated to Shandong First Medical University Jinan China
* Correspondence Qunye Zhang, National Key Laboratory for Innovation and Transformation of Luobing Theory, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
Email: wz.zhangqy@sdu.edu.cn

22 1 2024
4 2024
3 2 10.1002/imt2.v3.2 e16727 11 2023
09 10 2023
22 12 2023
© 2024 The Authors. iMeta published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of iMeta Science.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Abstract

Numerous studies have demonstrated the pivotal roles of intestinal microbiota in many physiopathological processes through complex interactions with the host. As a unique period in a woman's lifespan, pregnancy is characterized by changes in hormones, immunity, and metabolism. The gut microbiota also changes during this period and plays a crucial role in maintaining a healthy pregnancy. Consequently, anomalies in the composition and function of the gut microbiota, namely, gut microbiota dysbiosis, can predispose individuals to various pregnancy complications, posing substantial risks to both maternal and neonatal health. However, there are still many controversies in this field, such as “sterile womb” versus “in utero colonization.” Therefore, a thorough understanding of the roles and mechanisms of gut microbiota in pregnancy and its complications is essential to safeguard the health of both mother and child. This review provides a comprehensive overview of the changes in gut microbiota during pregnancy, its abnormalities in common pregnancy complications, and potential etiological implications. It also explores the potential of gut microbiota in diagnosing and treating pregnancy complications and examines the possibility of gut‐derived bacteria residing in the uterus/placenta. Our aim is to expand knowledge in maternal and infant health from the gut microbiota perspective, aiding in developing new preventive and therapeutic strategies for pregnancy complications based on intestinal microecology.

Gut microbiota is crucial for a healthy pregnancy, being affected by factors such as hormones, diet, obesity, nicotine, antibiotics, and microplastics. This article emphasizes the impact of gut microbiome changes on pregnancy complications and outcomes, delving into the underlying mechanisms and potential gut microbe‐based therapies. Additionally, it explores the contentious issue of bacterial presence in the uterine environment. FGR, fetal growth restriction; HT, hypothyroidism in pregnancy; ICP, intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy; PE, pre‐eclampsia; GDM, gestational diabetes mellitus; PROM, premature rupture of membranes; PTB, preterm birth.

Highlights

Pregnancy complications critically affect maternal and child health, necessitating urgent research and therapeutic strategies to reduce health and socioeconomic impacts.

Gut microbiota dysbiosis in patients with various pregnancy complications acts as both a causal factor and a contributor to these conditions.

Gut microbiota‐derived metabolites are involved in various pathophysiological pathways closely related to the pathogenesis of pregnancy complications, including intestinal barrier permeability, inflammatory responses, and glucose and lipid metabolism.

Emerging therapeutic strategies based on gut microbes show potential in treating pregnancy complications, yet there is a lack of evidence from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) to substantiate this approach.

gestational diabetes mellitus
gut microbiota
in utero colonization
microecological therapy
pre‐eclampsia
pregnancy complications
sterile womb
National Key R&D Program of China2021YFA1301102 National Natural Science Foundation of China82170495 82070820 Major Science and Technology Innovation Project of Shandong Province2018CXGC1218 source-schema-version-number2.0
cover-dateApril 2024
details-of-publishers-convertorConverter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.4.4 mode:remove_FC converted:13.06.2024
Tian, Zhenyu , Xinjie Zhang , Guixiang Yao , Jiajia Jin , Tongxue Zhang , Chunhua Sun , Zhe Wang , and Qunye Zhang . 2024. “Intestinal Flora and Pregnancy Complications: Current Insights and Future Prospects.” iMeta 3 , e167. 10.1002/imt2.167
==== Body
pmcINTRODUCTION

Pregnancy, a unique stage in a woman's life, involves significant physiological changes like hormonal, immune, and metabolic adaptations to support fetal development. Abnormalities in this process, including complications such as gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and pre‐eclampsia (PE), impact both the immediate and long‐term health of the mother and embryo. In 2023, the World Health Organization (WHO) reported that approximately 287,000 women globally succumbed to pregnancy‐related complications in 2020, averaging one death every 2 min [1]. This underscores the critical need for in‐depth research into the characteristics and mechanisms of these complications to protect women's and children's health.

The gut microbiota, exhibiting a complex symbiotic interaction with the host, is shaped by many factors including genetics, diet, hormone levels, delivery mode, and feeding method [2, 3]. Intriguingly, the human gut microbiota is likely to comprise a ratio closer to 1:1 in cell count compared to the human body [4, 5]. This ratio may vary among individuals due to factors such as body size and the amount of fecal material in the colon [4]. The gut microbiota, containing extensive genetic information and often regarded as the “second genome” and the largest endocrine organ in humans, is crucial for the host's immune, metabolic, endocrine, neural, and reproductive health [3, 6]. Extensive research has demonstrated that gut microbiota dysbiosis significantly contributes to various pathophysiological changes in the host and plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of numerous diseases, including cardiovascular, metabolic, and immune‐related conditions [3, 6].

During pregnancy, women's gut microbiota adapts to facilitate normal embryonic development and profoundly influences the structure and function of various host organs and tissues [7]. Consequently, dysbiosis of the gut microbiota inevitably impacts the health of both mother and fetus. Specifically, gut microbiota engages in complex interaction with reproductive hormones such as estrogen, significantly modulating the female reproductive endocrine system and crucially impacting women's reproductive health [8, 9]. A wealth of studies provide evidence associating gut microbiota dysbiosis during pregnancy with various complications, such as GDM, PE, fetal growth restriction (FGR), and preterm birth (PTB) [9, 10]. Nevertheless, much research in this area is still descriptive and insufficient. To uncover potential mechanisms, we offer specific experimental recommendations and suggest a path for commercialization or clinical translation.

In this review, from a pathophysiological perspective, we focus on the characteristic changes and etiological functions of the gut microbiota in pregnancy complications and their underlying mechanisms. Moreover, we discuss current insights on the possibility of existence of microbes in the uterus/placenta, which is critical for determining whether the gut microbiota impacts pregnancy complications directly or via certain metabolites, and for establishing the timeline of the origins of the infant gut microbiota. We also highlight the value of gut microbiota in the diagnosis and treatment of pregnancy complications and its great potential for clinical application through microbiota‐based interventions.

IMMUNOLOGICAL AND HORMONAL CHANGES IN PHYSIOLOGICAL PROGRESSION OF NORMAL PREGNANCY

The embryo, inherently foreign and highly antigenic to the mother, requires a balanced immune response to maintain its immune privilege, crucial for a healthy pregnancy (Figure 1) [11]. Before pregnancy, inflammatory factors remain low. Implantation of the fertilized ovum triggers minor endometrial damage and human leukocyte antigen exposure on trophoblast cells, activating an innate immune‐driven proinflammatory process [12, 13, 14]. In early placental formation, the rapid surge of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) stimulates the proliferation of decidual natural killer cells in the decidua. These cells release cytokines and chemokines, vital for remodeling spiral arteries [13, 14, 15]. Activated group 3 innate lymphoid cells generate various inflammatory factors including interleukin‐17 (IL‐17), IL‐22, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), IL‐8, and granulocyte‐macrophage colony‐stimulating factor [14]. Thus, the implantation stage and the subsequent first trimester are characterized by a proinflammatory environment.

Figure 1 Evolution of immunological, hormonal, and gut microbiota profiles during physiological pregnancy. The changes in the immunological landscape during pregnancy are characterized by an early proinflammatory milieu in the first trimester (T1), conducive to postimplantation recovery. During the second trimester (T2), maternal–fetal immune tolerance develops within an anti‐inflammatory milieu, promoting fetal growth. In the third trimester (T3), the proinflammatory environment is re‐established, triggering the onset of labor. Concurrent hormonal changes are featured by a surge in human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) levels early in gestation, which taper off gradually between Weeks 10 and 12, giving way to an escalating tide of progesterone and estrogen during T2. Microbiota dynamics are characterized by an initial reduction in α‐diversity and the amplification of Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria, and potentially pathogenic Enterobacteriaceae. Concurrently, the abundance of gut butyrate‐producing bacteria, such as Faecalibacterium and Eubacterium, declines. As T3 approaches, a significant bloom of Bifidobacteria readies the gut for impending childbirth. dNK cell, decidual natural killer cell; DSC, decidual stromal cell; GM‐CSF, granulocyte‐macrophage colony‐stimulating factor; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; IDO, indoleamine 2,3‐dioxygenase; IFNγ, interferon‐γ; ILC3, type 3 innate lymphoid cell; IL‐6, interleukin‐6; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; NETs, neutrophil extracellular traps; NO, nitric oxide; PGE, prostaglandin E; TGFβ, transforming growth factor β; tolDC, tolerogenic dendritic cells; TH1 cell, T helper 1 cell; TH2 cell, T helper 2 cell; TH17 cell, T helper 17 cell; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; Treg, regulatory T cell.

During the second trimester, immune tolerance peaks, alongside the production of anti‐inflammatory cells and factors, to shield the fetus from injury and rejection. The proliferation of regulatory T (Treg) cells (producing anti‐inflammatory cytokines such as IL‐10 and transforming growth factor‐β) is significantly enhanced, accompanied by the release of ovarian hormones such as estrogen and progesterone (anti‐inflammatory factors). The T‐cell populations at the placental–maternal interface shift from T helper 1 (Th1) (producing IL‐2, interferon‐gamma (IFNγ), and TNF) to Th2 (producing IL‐4, IL‐5, IL‐9, IL‐10, and IL‐13) and from Th17 (producing IL‐17) to Treg cells. These changes collectively buttress the embryo's immune privilege and are essential for maintaining placental–maternal tolerance [12, 16, 17].

Entering the third trimester, innate immune cells start a second proinflammatory process to trigger labor, releasing cytokines such as IL‐1, IL‐6, TNF, and matrix metalloproteinases from neutrophils and macrophages. Activated neutrophils increase the neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation, linked to PE [18]. Our previous study also reveals that NETs can promote the pathogenesis of another vascular inflammatory disease—abdominal aortic aneurysm [19]. After parturition, monocyte and neutrophil counts return to prepregnancy levels within 6 weeks, while T‐cell responses and CD4+/CD8+ proportions normalize over several months [20].

Dynamic hormonal changes are the central mechanisms sustaining pregnancy and preparing for childbirth. Following the fertilized ovum's implantation, the placental trophoblast begins to secrete hCG [21], which rises consistently, peaks between 10 and 12 weeks, and then gradually declines [22]. hCG contributes to blood vessels and placenta formation, contributes to fetal development, prevents uterine contractions, and concurrently stimulates progesterone and estrogen production [23]. Progesterone transforms stromal cells into decidual cells, maintaining endometrial stability and inhibiting premature uterine contractions [23]. Conversely, estrogen stimulates uterine vasodilation and blood flow increases to accommodate fetal growth and provokes uterine contractions in preparation for childbirth [24]. Additionally, the thyroid gland may become more active during pregnancy, potentially leading to hyperthyroidism (Figure 1) [25].

CHARACTERISTIC CHANGES IN GUT MICROBIOTA DURING PHYSIOLOGICAL PREGNANCY

The composition and function of the maternal gut microbiota shift throughout pregnancy (Figure 1). A Finnish case–control study discovered that the first gut microbiome, primarily composed of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes such as Clostridiales, shows similarities to that of nonpregnant women [26]. As pregnancy progresses from the first to the third trimester, the α‐diversity decreases and the β‐diversity increases, accompanied by an increase in Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria. Specifically, the Clostridiales order diminished, while the Enterobacteriaceae family increased [26]. Clostridiales is known for butyrate production, and its reduction weakens intestinal barrier function and anti‐inflammatory effects. Meanwhile, a rise in Enterobacteriaceae has been linked to the activation of inflammatory pathways [27, 28, 29]. This suggests that unfavorable microbiota changes in the later stages of pregnancy may be the onset of pregnancy complications. Coincidentally, complications such as GDM, PE, and intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) often occur in the later stages of pregnancy [30, 31, 32]. Further causal research has found that in comparison to the first trimester, fecal microbiota of third trimester pregnant women can induce metabolic syndrome (MS) symptoms in germ‐free mice [26]. Another study showed increased levels of Bifidobacterium during the third trimester of both humans and mice, driven directly by progesterone [33]. This microbial shift seemingly prepares for neonate birth and initial breastfeeding, given Bifidobacterium's documented potential for mother–infant transmission and the ability to metabolize human milk oligosaccharides, which is crucial to protect infants from infections and immune‐related diseases [34, 35]. These findings indicate that adaptive changes occur in the gut microbiota during pregnancy to support the increased metabolic demands and immune alterations, thereby maintaining normal pregnancy (Figure 1). However, other studies have reported conflicting results. One study found stable gut microbiota profiles during pregnancy with only a decrease in α‐diversity [36]. Another study reported no change in gut microbiota composition but potential shifts in metabolic activity [37].

Changes in α‐ and β‐diversity during physiological pregnancy vary across different longitudinal cohort studies. This inconsistency may be attributed to several factors, including age, obesity level, geographical location, short‐term dietary changes, small sample sizes, and participant characteristics [38]. To address these inconsistencies in gut microecology research, especially in cohort studies, the following should be considered: (1) conducting large‐scale, multicenter studies; (2) thoroughly collecting and recording factors influencing gut microbiota, demographics, and clinical data; (3) optimizing data analysis methods, using artificial intelligence methods like multivariable analysis and linear mixed models to explore diverse factors' effects and their interactions on gut microbiota, thereby identifying genuine microbiota changes linked to diseases; (4) employing techniques like CRISPR‐Cas, fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), and washed microbiota transplantation (WMT); and (5) using antibiotic‐treated or germ‐free animal models to elucidate causal relationships between gut bacteria and diseases.

INTERREGULATION OF GUT MICROBIOTA AND PREGNANCY‐RELATED HORMONES

During pregnancy, a subtle interplay forms between gut microbiota and hormones like estrogen and progesterone. As pregnancy progresses, gut microbiota changes directly or indirectly regulate the maternal hormonal environment via metabolites or enzyme activity to meet the demands of pregnancy. Understanding these gut microbiota–hormone interactions offers fresh insights and strategies for enhancing pregnancy health.

Estrogen

Estrogen, particularly estradiol, is a key hormone in maintaining feminine traits and decreases with age. The gut microbiota significantly regulates estrogen levels and is influenced by estrogen [39]. The human gut metagenome is widely populated with genes encoding estrogen‐metabolizing enzymes, termed the “estrobolome” [40]. These enzymes (e.g., β‐glucuronidases, β‐glucosidases) deconjugate estrogen to promote intestinal reabsorption. Reduced intestinal flora diversity can lower β‐glucuronidase activity, inhibiting estrogen deconjugation and reabsorption in the intestinal tract, thereby decreasing the host's circulation and total estrogen burden [40]. Conversely, higher β‐glucuronidase‐producing bacteria (Table S1) may increase circulating estrogen [41]. Klebsiella aerogenes TS2020, known for its estradiol‐degrading properties, reduces serum estradiol levels by 3β‐hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase [42].

On the other hand, estrogen substantially affects gut microbiota, with estrogen receptor‐β (ERβ) in colonic epithelium crucial for microbiota balance. ERβ−/− mice exhibit a reduced Bacteroidetes proportion (e.g., Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron) and an increase in Proteobacteria (e.g., Escherichia coli, Desulfovibrio vulgaris) compared to ERβ+/+ mice [43]. In mono‐associated rats, B. thetaiotaomicron, notable for acetate production, was found to enhance goblet cell differentiation, increase mucus‐related gene expression, and alter the balance of sialylated versus sulfated mucins [44]. Therefore, we speculate that B. thetaiotaomicron may help in estrogen‐mediated intestinal epithelial barrier repair [45].

Recent findings showed that gut microbiota dysbiosis induced by ERβ knockout triggered hyperactivity of the hypothalamic‐pituitary‐adrenal axis, which is associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and anxiety‐like behaviors [46]. Additionally, in male and ovariectomized female mice treated with 17β‐estradiol, there was a noticeable reduction in lipopolysaccharides (LPS)‐producing Proteobacteria and its subclasses, including γ‐Proteobacteria class, Enterobacteriaceae family, and the Escherichia/Shigella genus. For more representative LPS‐producing bacteria within the Proteobacteria phylum, see the literature [47] and Table S2. These findings suggest estrogen's potential role in decreasing LPS by gut microbiota, potentially leading to decreased intestinal permeability. This could further help in mitigating metabolic endotoxemia (ME) and low‐grade chronic inflammation, both of which are known to contribute to MS. Thus, the interplay between estrogen and gut bacteria plays a vital role in healthy pregnancy outcomes.

Progesterone

Compared to estrogen, there are currently fewer studies regarding the connection between gut microbiota and progesterone. Recently, Kamimura et al. revealed that germ‐free mice have significantly lower fecal progesterone levels [48]. During pregnancy, elevated progesterone suppresses Th1 immune responses and inflammatory cytokines like IFNγ, while enhancing Th2 responses and anti‐inflammatory cytokines [49]. Nuriel‐Ohayon et al. discovered that nonpregnant female mice, with progesterone subcutaneously implanted for 21 days, exhibited substantial alterations in their gut microbiota, particularly an increase of Bifidobacterium [33]. Bifidobacterium offers health advantages by mitigating weight gain, improving insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance, and reducing inflammatory substances such as IL‐6 from adipose tissue in pregnant animals on high‐fat diets [50, 51, 52]. Higher Bifidobacterium levels induced by progesterone may enhance pregnancy outcomes, as low levels are linked to PTB [53]. This is further supported by evidence showing that administering progesterone to women with a history of PTBs and a high risk of recurrence can decrease the likelihood of another PTB by 33% [54]. Another research conducted by Nuriel‐Ohayon et al. revealed that administering progesterone alters the gut microbiome in females, resulting in weight gain, an effect replicable in germ‐free mice through fecal transplant [55]. These findings illustrate a complex interaction between gut microbiota and progesterone.

Androgens

In females, androgens are synthesized primarily in the adrenal cortex and ovaries [56]. Hannah Colldén et al. identified a decrease in the free form of dihydrotestosterone, in the lower intestinal tract of germ‐free mice, underlining the gut microbiome's significant impact on androgen metabolism [57]. Gut microbiome can regulate local and systemic androgen levels. For example, FMT from male mice to germ‐free mice can elevate serum testosterone levels [58]. Analogous to estrogens, androgens undergo conjugation in the liver and subsequently excreted into the intestine via bile. Certain gut bacteria, such as E. coli, have metagenomes encoding enzymes that deconjugate androgens, thereby increasing their absorption and circulation levels [57, 59]. Additionally, research indicates that prevalent intestinal microbiota, including E. coli and Bacteroides spp., are capable of synthesizing androgens from bile acids [60]. These findings imply that the gut microbiome has the capacity to regulate the exposure of intestinal epithelial cells to sex hormones through multiple pathways.

Excessive synthesis of androgens can induce diseases such as polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). In patients with PCOS, Bacteroides vulgatus are significantly higher. Transplanting gut microbes from patients with PCOS or from those colonized with B. vulgatus to recipient mice creates PCOS‐like conditions. These symptoms include a notable decrease in IL‐22 and glycodeoxycholic acid (GDCA) concentrations, significant impairment in ovarian activities, heightened insulin resistance, modifications in bile acid processing, and fertility issues [61].

On the other hand, the research conducted by Elin Org et al. showcased how androgens influence the microbiome. Their findings indicated a notable variation in the gut microbiota composition when comparing gonadectomized male rats to those that underwent sham surgeries. However, this difference was mitigated through dihydrotestosterone supplementation [62].

Thyroid hormones

Triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) are key hormones in the regulation of metabolic processes and are integral to maintaining normal reproductive function in both sexes [8]. Thyroid hormones and gut microbiota exhibit a bidirectional relationship. In pregnant women, levothyroxine (LT4) treatment alters the abundance of various bacteria in thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPOAb)‐positive subclinical hypothyroidism (SCH). This includes an enrichment of Blautia, Streptococcus salivarius, and Bifidobacterium longum in third trimester and a depletion of Bacteroidota, Bacteroidales, Bacteroidia, and Prevotella in second trimester, as well as Agathobacter in third trimester [63]. Xie et al., through Mendelian randomization analysis, determined that specific gut microbiota categories may play an etiological role in thyroid function at the genetic level and could potentially become effective biomarkers for the early diagnosis of thyroid‐related diseases. Among them, the phylum Actinobacteria exhibited a defensive role in preventing hypothyroidism, and the class Deltaproteobacteria demonstrated a protective effect against hyperthyroidism [64]. Our prior research has revealed gut microbiota dysbiosis in Graves' disease patients, and this phenotype and the increased T4 levels can be transferred by FMT, the underlying mechanism is achieved through modulating the differentiation of intestinal Treg and Th17 cell [65].

Abundant evidence supports the gut microbiota's mediating role in the metabolism of peripheral iodothyronines [66]. Intestinal microbes act as hydrolase executors and help maintain intestinal barrier integrity [67]. Studies have demonstrated that significant quantities of conjugated iodothyronines undergo hydrolysis within the fecal material [68]. A sort of obligate anaerobic bacteria possess glucuronidase activities and effectively hydrolyze conjugated T4 in the gut, facilitating hormone reabsorption into circulation and affecting the iodothyronine pool [69]. For example, even in small amounts like 3 × 107/mL, Peptococcus productus can hydrolyze 50% of sulfated iodothyronines in 24 h [66, 70]. Some researchers even consider the gut microbiota to be a component of the intestinal barrier. In germ‐free mice, microbiota deficiencies reduce intestinal surface area, potentially disrupting the oral T4 reabsorption process through the enterohepatic circulation [66, 71]. The effect of microbiota on thyroid hormone balance is a fascinating research topic. Studies show that thyroid disorders during pregnancy, like hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism, can lead to a higher risk of miscarriage and PTB. This indicates that gut microbiota might affect reproductive health by changing thyroid function.

NONHORMONAL FACTORS AFFECTING GUT MICROBIOTA DURING PREGNANCY

Diet

Diet significantly impacts gut microbiota [72]. Pregnant women generally exhibit higher diet quality scores than those trying to conceive or in their reproductive years, often due to increased awareness of the importance of nutrition. As a result, they often increase their intake of nutrient‐rich foods, prioritizing key components such as protein, sugar, fat, fiber, and various vitamins [73].

A fiber‐rich diet during pregnancy enhances gut microbiota richness and diversity, reducing the levels of Collinsella and Holdemania, while promoting the growth of bacteria known for producing short‐chain fatty acids (SCFAs), including Roseburia and Lachnospiraceae. This shift elevates SCFA levels, promoting gut mucosal health and mitigating inflammation [74, 75]. In contrast, the Western diet triggers a generational depletion in “ancestral” gut microbial diversity and dysbiosis, contributing to adverse maternal and infant health outcomes [76]. High carbohydrate intake during pregnancy is positively correlated with an abundance of Proteobacteria and Bacteroides, while being negatively correlated with Firmicutes (e.g., the Ruminococcaceae family and Ruminococcus genus) and Roseburia. Conversely, lower carbohydrate intake is linked with an increased Lachnospira [77].

The second dietary change during pregnancy is an increases intake of protein‐rich beef [78]. High total protein intake, particularly from animal proteins, tends to reduce Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria and increase methanogens, important for hydrogen removal and nutrient energy yield [74, 79]. High sugar diets reduce the synthesis of the microbial metabolite indole, contrary to protein‐rich diets that increase it. Indole is beneficial for glucose metabolism and lowering blood lipid levels [80, 81]. Consequently, the Mediterranean diet, known for naturally enhancing indole concentrations, acts as a potential protective factor in metabolic regulation [82]. However, it should be noted that many fruits contain high levels of sugar, such as juices, apples, grapes, and watermelon, as well as peas, asparagus, and zucchini. Additionally, the fructose supplementation during gestation significantly reduces Lactobacillus and Bacteroides, thereby impairing gut barrier function in rat offspring [83]. Therefore, consuming a moderate amount of foods with lower fructose content, such as bananas, strawberries, blueberries, avocados, lettuce, and green beans, is advisable for pregnant women.

According to Public Health Institute standards, approximately 35% of pregnant women consume excessive amounts of fat, compared to 23% of nonpregnant women [78]. A high‐fat diet increases intestinal Akkermansia, known for its mucin‐degrading properties, while reducing butyrate‐producing genera such as Lachnospira and Ruminococcus. It also enhances the abundance of Collinsella spp. in the colon, disrupts the gut barrier integrity, and stimulates the production of IL‐17A, which potentially influences placental angiogenesis and fetal gut development [84, 85].

Additionally, many pregnant women frequently take vitamins and folic acid [73]. A diet rich in vitamin D has been linked to a higher abundance of Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria, which include many low pathogenicity species and Staphylococcus [79]. Monounsaturated fatty acids, cholesterol, and vitamin A are also correlated with an increase in Proteobacteria that contain pathogens and exhibit proinflammatory properties [79]. However, higher vitamin E intakes were associated with lower Proteobacteria and Sutterella levels, the latter being more prevalent in infants with autism and gastrointestinal disorders [86], indicating potential health benefits of vitamin E [79]. Animal studies reported that pregnancy diets rich in vitamins or imbalanced in folic acid and choline can lead to gut microbiome dysbiosis, potentially increasing obesity risk in offspring [87]. Therefore, not all types of vitamins uniformly benefit gut microbiota health, highlighting the need for controlled intake and mindful selection of vitamins and folate during pregnancy.

Another change in the dietary behavior of pregnant women is the increased consumption of milk and dairy products [78]. The impact of maternal milk intake on the mother's own gut microbiota has not been extensively reported, but research suggests a connection between consuming cow's milk during breastfeeding and a reduced incidence of food allergies in their children [88]. The influence of fermented dairy products like yogurt will be discussed later.

These findings highlight the substantial impact of maternal diet on gut microbiota, with potential lifelong effects on mother and child health. Future gut microbiota research faces the challenge of reducing pregnancy complications through fiber‐rich diets and personalized nutrition, aiming to restore the “ancestral” gut microbiome characteristic of preindustrialized, plant‐rich diets. Such a diet nurtured a gut microbiome proficient in processing microbiota‐accessible carbohydrates, promoting a human genome that synergizes well with these fibrolytic microbes and their metabolites. This synergy could decrease chronic inflammation and obesity cases, lowering the risk of noncommunicable chronic diseases [89].

Obesity

Obesity, the most prevalent metabolic disorder during pregnancy, is closely associated with adverse outcomes such as placental hypoxia [90]. Obese pregnant women present an increased Firmicutes‐to‐Bacteroidetes ratio and a substantial reduction in gut microbiota diversity in late gestation [91]. Maternal diet‐induced obesity results in lower intestinal levels of SCFA‐producing Lachnospiraceae, butyric acid, and SCFA receptors messenger RNA [90]. A significant decline in beneficial bacteria such as Bifidobacteria and Lactobacilli and an increase in potential harmful bacteria such as E. coli, Enterobacteriaceae, and Staphylococcus aureus are observed in the gut of obese pregnant women [76, 92]. Moreover, alterations in the gut microbiota of obese pregnant women have substantial implications for their offspring. Infants born to overweight and obese mothers are more susceptible to obesity, possibly due to transmission of specific bacteria and metabolites. Fecal samples from these infants showed a markedly reduced abundance of Ruminococcus, Blautia, and Eubacterium in the phylum Firmicutes, whereas Oscillibacter and Parabacteroides are more prevalent. This shift may elevate the risk of metabolic diseases in offspring [93, 94, 95]. In summary, obesity is intimately tied to an imbalance of gut microbiota, metabolic disorders, and systemic inflammation in pregnant women.

Nicotine exposure

Nicotine, the primary hazardous component of tobacco, enters the body through inhalation, dermal absorption, and gastrointestinal tract. Nicotine intake during pregnancy is considered a major risk factor for complications, potentially due to its association with gut microbiota dysbiosis [96]. Nicotine significantly decreases beneficial intestinal bacteria (e.g., Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus), while increasing pathogenic bacteria (e.g., E. coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae) in pregnant rats [97]. In the samples of colon and plasma from healthy pregnant women, levels of propionic acid, butyric acid, and caprylic acid are positively correlated, but nicotine exposure disrupts these relationships. This suggests that nicotine may interfere with the production and absorption of intestinal SCFAs [97]. Another study indicated that prenatal nicotine exposure induces an increase in Actinobacteria in pregnant rats, potentially causing an increase in Firmicutes and a decrease in Verrucomicrobia. Furthermore, nicotine downregulates several genes in the proximal colon microbiota of pregnant women, which are typically upregulated during pregnancy, such as free fatty acid receptor 2 (FFAR2), the acetate and propionate transporter, and tryptophan hydroxylase 2 (TPH2), the rate‐limiting enzyme for the production of 5‐hydroxytryptamine [98]. Cumulatively, these findings confirm that nicotine exposure can markedly modulate the gut microbiota in pregnant women, potentially jeopardizing fetal development by affecting the gut‐derived metabolite bioactive molecules.

Antibiotic use

Antibiotics, especially broad‐spectrum types, can significantly and persistently alter the gut microbiota, reducing its taxonomic abundance and diversity. Such disruption can upset the delicate equilibrium between beneficial and harmful bacteria, promoting the proliferation of antibiotic‐resistant bacteria and health issues [99, 100]. Li et al. reported that perinatal antibiotic exposure disrupts the mother‐to‐offspring commensal microbiota transmission during the pivotal period of initial microbial colonization, allowing environment‐derived bacteria, including hospital‐associated strains, to colonize the neonatal intestine [101]. Perinatal antimicrobial prophylaxis (IAP) is the most common route of perinatal and neonatal antibiotic exposure [102]. Many studies underscored the effect of IAP on gut microbiota development, including an increase in Enterobacteriaceae and a decrease in anaerobic bacteria such as Bifidobacterium and Bacteroides [103]. IAP also negatively hampers the normal establishment of the Bifidobacterial community in newborns [104]. Numerous investigations have identified a dose‐dependent correlation between maternal antibiotic use and increased risks of eczema, food allergies, asthma, and obesity in offspring [105]. Although life‐saving, antibiotics may engender complex influences on maternal and fetal gut microbiota. Prescribing antibiotics during pregnancy requires careful deliberation, balancing benefits and risks to minimize potential harm.

Microplastics (MPs)

MPs, including particles <5 mm and nanosized plastics <1 μm, are ubiquitous in the global biosphere, contaminating everything from the air to our food. This widespread pollution is of growing concern for the health of infants and pregnant women [106]. MPs have been discovered in human placenta, meconium, and infant stool [107, 108], yet tracking their origins is challenging. Inhalation, placental transfer, breastfeeding and ingestion, and dermal absorption all could potentially serve as exposure pathways for child‐related MPs [109].

A study presents the initial evidence linking MPs to microbiota in human placentas and meconium. It found 16 varieties of MPs across all samples and an inverse relationship between MPs (specifically polystyrene and polyethylene particles sized 50–100 μm) and several genera in the placental and meconium microbiota, suggesting MPs influence microbiota composition [110]. Another study showed that maternal exposure to polystyrene MPs during gestation and lactation caused metabolic and gut microbiota imbalances in maternal mice, with intergenerational effects like persistent liver lipid metabolism dysregulation in their offspring [111]. Additionally, chronic exposure to MPs exacerbated liver damage elicited by cyclophosphamide, significantly linked to colon impairments including increased intestinal permeability, mild inflammation, and reduced antioxidant function, as well as gut microbiota disturbances. These findings were further validated through FMT experiments [112]. To date, most research on MPs focuses on marine environments, with limited studies on MPs and gut microbiota, hindering long‐term tracking of MP concentrations. Furthermore, there is also a lack of longitudinal cohort studies on the relationship between MPs and maternal and child health.

To mitigate the impact of MPs on maternal and child health, we recommend food manufacturers optimize their design and materials to minimize MP generation and contamination and verify product safety. Interdisciplinary research is essential to fully understand the effects of early‐life MP exposure on gut microbiota and health. Mother–infant cohort studies should include microplastic exposure considerations, collecting relevant samples and data. Families can take measures to reduce children's exposure to MPs, such as avoiding food contact with plastic, choosing safer personal care products and building materials, and selecting plastic‐free or low‐plastic options for baby products and toys.

DYSBIOSIS AND ITS ETIOLOGICAL ROLES OF GUT MICROBIOTA IN PREGNANCY COMPLICATIONS

Currently, there is still controversy regarding the relationship between pregnancy complications and adverse pregnancy outcomes. One perspective defines an adverse pregnancy outcome as any event that diminishes the possibility of delivering a healthy baby. This includes conditions like PTB, FGR, fetal anomalies, stillbirth, intrauterine fetal death, and infants small for gestational age. These outcomes have been associated with specific pregnancy complications, such as PE and GDM [113, 114]. However, there are also some viewpoints that classify PTB, FGR, and other obstetric abnormalities as part of pregnancy complications [115, 116]. In this context, we categorize PTB and FGR as adverse pregnancy outcomes.

GDM

GDM is a transient hyperglycemia during pregnancy [30]. Its prevalence ranges between 5.4% and 14%, and it is considered a prediabetic state [117]. Compared to healthy pregnant women at the same gestational stage, the gut microbiota of GDM women is markedly disturbed, akin to the typical composition in nonpregnant type 2 diabetes patients [30, 118, 119]. For instance, Bacteroides, Parabacteroides distasonis, and Klebsiella variicola are significantly enriched in the guts of women with GDM. Conversely, Alistipes spp., Methanobrevibacter smithii, Bifidobacterium spp., and Eubacterium spp. are massively enriched in the intestines of normoglycemic pregnant women [120]. Recently, Sun et al. clarified the correlations between 10 specific microbial species and GDM. For example, Alistipes putredinis and Bifidobacterium dentium are negatively correlated with GDM, while E. coli, a member of the Enterobacteriaceae family, is positively correlated with GDM, glycemic indicators (fasting glucose, glycated hemoglobin), and weight parameters (body mass index, gestational weight gain). Remarkably, a GDM risk score based on these 10 bacteria is consistently higher in GDM patients than that in controls throughout pregnancy [121]. Dietary fiber‐rich foods affect the impact of these bacteria on glycemic indices, with metabolic pathways involved in fiber degradation strongly negatively correlating with fasting glucose levels [121]. Despite variations in the microbial taxa associated with GDM across studies, there is generally an increase in Enterobacteriaceae, Desulfovibrio, P. distasonis, Ruminococcaceae, Prevotella, and Collinsella and a decrease in Alistipes spp., Faecalibacterium, and Bifidobacterium [121, 122]. These studies collectively demonstrate a strong link between gut microbiota changes and GDM. Endotoxin‐producing opportunistic pathogens such as Enterobacteriaceae are enriched in GDM patients [123], which correlates positively with GDM in Sun et al.'s study. Conversely, keystone species responsible for starch degradation and SCFA production, such as Alistipes and Bifidobacterium, which have shown beneficial effects in preventing inflammation and insulin resistance [124, 125], are depleted in patients with GDM, as shown by their negative correlation with GDM in Sun et al.'s study. Therefore, these three categories of gut bacteria are likely involved in the development of GDM.

A decline in SCFAs, key gut microbiota metabolites including acetate, butyrate, and propionate, correlates with glucose metabolism disturbances. SCFAs can bind to G protein‐coupled receptor 41 (GPR41) and GPR43, inducing the release of peptide tyrosine tyrosine and glucagon‐like peptide‐1 (GLP‐1) from enteroendocrine cells, thereby regulating insulin release and glucose metabolism [126]. Additionally, bacteria that degrade aromatic amino acids (AAAs) are significantly reduced in patients with GDM. Indoles, intestinal metabolites of AAAs, can stimulate GLP‐1 release via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway [127, 128]. Multiple studies have reported various beneficial effects of indole and its derivatives, such as protecting mucosal intestinal epithelial cell function, its anti‐inflammatory properties, improving insulin resistance, inhibiting LPS translocation, and reversing metabolic dysfunction [129, 130]. However, inconsistent research findings exist. For instance, higher serum and fecal indole concentrations have been observed in women with GDM compared to non‐GDM women, with a positive correlation between indole and GDM risk [131, 132]. Notably, the GDM phenotype can be effectively transmitted through FMT (Figures 2 and 3) [133].

Figure 2 Conceptual depiction of mechanisms for gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). Maternal gut dysbiosis worsens GDM outcomes. Short‐chain fatty acids (SCFAs) mainly produced by gut microbes Faecalibacterium and Bifidobacterium bind to G protein‐coupled receptor 41 (GPR41) and GPR43, facilitating the release of glucagon‐like peptide‐1 (GLP‐1) and peptide tyrosine tyrosine (PYY) from enteroendocrine L‐cells. Indoles, the metabolic products of aromatic amino acids (AAAs), stimulate GLP‐1 release via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) pathway. Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) synthesized by gut Enterobacteriaceae increase the levels of certain proinflammatory factors in the gut through Toll‐like receptor‐4 (TLR4). During pregnancy, gut dysbiosis leads to a reduced SCFA levels, diminishing GLP‐1 and PYY influx into circulation and concurrently escalating LPS levels, thereby promoting excessive LPS and proinflammatory factors entry into the bloodstream. These shifts further contribute to enhanced inflammation and decreased insulin sensitivity in extraintestinal tissues and organs including brain, muscles, liver, and adipose tissue, ultimately leading to the onset of GDM.

Figure 3 Enumeration of intestinal microbes and associated functional changes in pregnancy complications. This figure summarizes the findings from metagenomic and 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing studies, outlining the selected microbes and associated functional features alongside their tendencies in pregnancy complications. Despite discrepancies across studies, the curated list shows common patterns presented in different research. While not exhaustive of all microbes or functional changes, it represents those most frequently observed in association with pregnancy complications. CRP, C‐reactive protein; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; FT4, free thyroxine; FXR, farnesoid X receptor; IL‐8, interleukin 8; NF‐κB, nuclear factor‐κB; SIBO, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth; TPO‐Ab, thyroid peroxidase antibody; TSH, thyroid‐stimulating hormone. ↑ indicates higher levels in pregnancy complications compared with control; ↓ indicates lower abundance in pregnancy complications compared with control.

PE

PE is a pregnancy‐specific syndrome, defined by new‐onset hypertension after 20 weeks of gestation and at least one accompanying complication, such as proteinuria, maternal organ dysfunction (e.g., renal insufficiency, liver impairment, neurological or hematological disorders), or uteroplacental dysfunction (e.g., FGR) [31]. Arguably, PE is one of the most serious complications of pregnancy and is a leading cause of perinatal mortality worldwide. Currently, there is no effective treatment for PE other than the termination of pregnancy [31, 134].

Studies have highlighted notable gut microbiota differences in PE patients compared to healthy pregnant women. Research in China identified increased Bulleidia moorei and Clostridium perfringens and decreased propionate‐producing Coprococcus catus in PE patients [39]. A recent large‐scale Mendelian randomization study confirmed the causal link between Bifidobacterium and reduced risk of PE, providing a clue for further investigation into the protective effects of probiotics against PE [135]. In a study published in Gut, a 16S sequencing analysis of fecal microbiota from 67 PE patients and 85 healthy pregnant women revealed lower α‐diversity and significant dysbiosis in the gut microbiota of PE patients [136]. In detail, pathogenic genera such as Clostridium (exc. Clostridium butyricum, a beneficial member), Dialister, Veillonella, and Fusobacterium were significantly enriched, while probiotic genera like Lachnospira, Akkermansia, and Faecalibacterium were diminished. These microbial alterations correlated with clinical indicators of PE, such as blood pressure and biomarkers of liver and kidney function. Gut microbiota from PE patients could markedly raise blood pressure in prepregnant mice. After pregnancy, these mice exhibited further elevated blood pressure, accompanied by proteinuria, embryonic resorption or disintegration, reduced fetal–placental weight, and placental inflammation. These findings illuminate the critical causal role of gut microbiota dysbiosis in PE pathogenesis. Mechanistically, small intestinal T‐lymphocyte disruption and intestinal leakage allowed bacteria such as Fusobacterium to translocate into the placenta, increasing inflammation and impairing growth [136]. Our study likewise found gut microbiota dysbiosis in PE patients, with reduced SCFA‐producing bacteria and lower placental propionic and butyric acids. Akkermansia muciniphila, propionic acid, or butyric acid could ameliorate hypertension, embryonic/placental dysgenesis, and poor spiral artery remodeling in pre‐eclamptic rats [137]. Mechanistically, these agents enhanced autophagy in placental macrophages and inhibited their M1 phenotypic conversion. Propionic acid was found to promote macrophage autophagy, M2 polarization, and trophoblast invasion via activation of AMPK‐mTOR, GPR43‐STAT1, and GPR41‐AKT signaling pathways. However, the cycle threshold values of bacteria in the peripheral blood and placenta of pregnant women detected by quantitative polymerase chain reaction exceeded the sensitivity of the PCR instrument, providing no evidence of intestinal bacterial translocation to the placenta via the bloodstream. Therefore, we prefer that gut bacteria regulate PE occurrence through their metabolites, SCFAs, rather than the bacteria themselves (Figures 3 and 4) [137]. The translocation of gut bacteria and their presence in the placenta will be discussed later.

Figure 4 Schematic representation of mechanisms underpinning pre‐eclampsia (PE). Maternal gut dysbiosis drives the progression of PE. In PE patients, gut leakage coincides with a significant decline in Akkermansia, a key contributor to SCFA production. This reduction leads to a paucity of circulating SCFAs available to the placenta, triggering a series of events: hypertension ensues, autophagy in placental macrophages is inhibited, the transformation from M2 to M1 macrophage phenotype is enhanced, and trophoblast invasion is impaired. These events subsequently contribute to abnormalities in embryonic and placental development, as well as abnormal remodeling of spiral arteries. Concurrently, a pronounced increase in Fusobacterium, together with gut leakage in PE patients, facilitates its translocation into the placenta, thereby exacerbating placental inflammation and causing abnormal growth. Collectively, these perturbations orchestrate the onset of PE. MCP‐1, monocyte chemoattractant protein‐1; MIF, macrophage migration inhibitory factor; sENG, soluble endoglin; sFlt‐1, soluble fms‐like tyrosine kinase‐1.

Although direct evidence linking gut microbiota‐derived indole and its derivatives to PE is currently lacking, emerging research suggests indole's positive effects on immune regulation and vascular function. For example, indole‐3‐aldehyde, produced by Lactobacillus reuteri, showcases its beneficial properties by preventing vascular smooth muscle cells phenotypic switch, minimizes macrophage infiltration, and reduces the release of inflammatory cytokines, collectively postpone aortic dissection progression [138]. Meanwhile, L. reuteri, Akkermansia, and the Clostiridum genus are key in producing indole‐3‐propionic acid [82], which combats oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation, and inflammation at the cellular level. Intriguingly, its synthesis is observed to decrease in individuals with various histological classifications of atherosclerosis [82]. These findings underscore the potential of indole as a promising intervention strategy for the prophylaxis of vascular diseases. Given the previously validated role of SCFAs generated by Akkermansia in PE [137], exploring indole metabolites produced by Akkermansia and other bacteria is also pertinent in PE research.

ICP

ICP is the most common pregnancy‐specific liver disease, occurring mainly in the second and third trimesters, characterized by maternal pruritus and hepatic dysfunction, including elevated serum bile acids and transaminases [32]. ICP increases the risk of adverse perinatal outcomes, such as FGR, spontaneous PTB (SPTB), low Apgar scores, and even intrauterine death [139]. The etiology and pathophysiology of ICP remain unclear.

Many studies have shown significant abnormalities in gut microbiota in patients with ICP compared to healthy individuals [140]. For instance, a high relative abundance of Bacteroidetes and a pronounced deficiency of SCFA‐producing bacteria (e.g., Faecalibacterium, Blautia, and Eubacterium hallii) have been noted. Enterobacteriaceae and Leuconostocaceae, along with rare bacterial species (e.g., Blautia and Citrobacter), were found to be elevated in ICP patients [141]. Escherichia_Shigella, Turicibacter, and Olsenella were significantly enriched in severe ICP cases [140].

Bacteria enriched in ICP patients are closely associated with bile acid metabolism, inflammation, and cirrhosis (e.g., Bilophila and Parabacteroides) [142]. The bile salt hydrolase (BSH) activity of some gut bacteria influences bile acid dihydroxylation and deconjugation, regulating the bile acid pool [143, 144]. The farnesoid X receptor (FXR) is expressed in the ileum and liver and fulfill a critical role in regulating bile acid homeostasis [139]. Recent studies show an enrichment of Bacteroides fragilis in the intestines of ICP patients. B. fragilis can directly mediate the deconjugation of GDCA via its BSH activity, thus inhibiting the FXR‐FGF15/19 enterohepatic signaling pathway, promoting hepatic bile acid synthesis and exacerbating ICP. Therefore, modulating the gut microbiota–bile acid–FXR axis may be beneficial for ICP treatment [139]. However, some studies demonstrated a reduction in BSH‐active bacteria in the intestine, leading to an increase in conjugated bile acids and an inhibition of intestinal FXR pathways, resulting in elevated hepatic bile acid synthesis [145]. This discrepancy may be attributed to different BSH‐active bacteria targeting different types of conjugated bile acids (Figure 3).

Hypothyroidism in pregnancy

Hypothyroidism in pregnancy is characterized as a systemic hypometabolic syndrome, typically due to hypothyroxinemia or thyroid hormone resistance, presenting with an incidence of approximately 0.5%. The etiology of this disorder remains elusive [146]. Despite research exploring the gut microbiota composition in individuals with thyroid dysfunction [147, 148], attention has only recently turned to hypothyroidism in pregnancy. A study of pregnant women with SCH indicated a correlation between small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) and SCH. Compared to healthy controls, the prevalence of SIBO is elevated in SCH patients, who also exhibit higher levels of C‐reactive protein (CRP) and an increased incidence of bloating and constipation. Moreover, SIBO was positively associated with thyroid‐stimulating hormone and TPOAb levels and inversely correlated with free thyroxine (FT4) levels [149]. In 2022, Wu et al. disclosed that Faecalibacterium, Bacteroides, Prevotella 9, Bifidobacterium, Subdoligranulum, Lachnospira, and Megamonas were the dominant bacterial genera in pregnant women with SCH. Levothyroxine (LT4) treatment influenced the gut microbiota composition, implying that the gut microbiota could be a novel therapeutic target [150]. Additional studies have revealed distinct gut microbiota in hypothyroid pregnant women, with higher Prevotella and Haemophilus and lower Blautia compared to healthy controls (Figure 3) [151]. Clearly, research on the gut microbiota and thyroid dysfunction during pregnancy is still in a descriptive phase compared to other diseases.

Subsequent research should primarily focus on the following areas: (1) directly measuring the microbial composition in feces of pregnant patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis or Graves' disease on propylthiouracil (PTU) or TPOAb‐positive SCH patients on LT4, alongside checking plasma PTU or LT4 levels. This will clarify thyroid hormones' impact on gut microbiota; (2) conducting experiments to elucidate causal relationships between gut microbiota and thyroid dysfunction during pregnancy; (3) performing preclinical studies to uncover the underlying mechanisms of characteristic bacteria involved in pregnancy‐related thyroid dysfunctions. Based on these fundamental studies, further clinical trials can be conducted to test probiotics, such as B. longum, known to improve thyroid function [152], and other promising probiotics found in preclinical studies, to evaluate their effectiveness in pregnant women with thyroid disorders for clinical application.

Premature rupture of membranes (PROM)

PROM accounts for nearly one‐third of SPTBs and is a high‐risk factor for neonatal sepsis and mortality [153]. Bacterial infections and the ensuing inflammatory responses are key contributors to PROM [154]. Traditionally, the uterine cavity is viewed as a sterile environment, which has been challenged by the detection of bacterial DNA through PCR methods [155, 156]. Ascending infections from the vagina are considered the primary cause of PROM, but gut bacteria migrating to the vagina and amniotic fluid suggest they might also cause intrauterine infections linked to PROM [157, 158]. Listeria monocytogenes can traverse the intestinal mucosal barrier and infect the placenta via hematogenous transmission, which lends further support to this notion [159]. Research has suggested that the gut microbiota of pregnant women might relocate to the vagina, altering vaginal flora. Oral administration of Lactobacillus can alter vaginal flora and inflammatory response, underscoring the potential relationship between gut and vaginal microbiota [160]. Generally, compared to gut microbiota, a lower abundance and diversity of vaginal flora in nonpregnant women is considered beneficial in maintaining healthy and stable pregnancy [161]. However, women with PROM show complex, abnormal vaginal microbiota with increased diversity and pathogens. These bacteria can ascend, colonize placental tissue, cause chorioamnionitis, and trigger PROM [162, 163]. Overall, these findings suggest that gut microbiota may directly or indirectly influence the intrauterine environment, playing a key role in PROM and offering avenues for new preventive and therapeutic approaches (Figure 3).

Maternal dyslipidemia and hypertension during pregnancy

Several studies have highlighted the involvement of gut microbiota in the development of maternal dyslipidemia and hypertension during pregnancy. Many pregnant women develop gestational hypertension (GH) before PE occurs. In 2023, evidence from Mendelian randomization revealed a protective effect of the probiotics Bifidobacterium and Intestinibacter on GH [164]. A nested case–control study observed gut microbiota dysbiosis in pregnancy‐induced hypertension (PIH) patients, including a reduction in beneficial bacteria like A. putredinis and A. muciniphila from early pregnancy. Bacterial pathway analyses indicate that this dysbiosis may contribute to the development of PIH by affecting the metabolism of vitamin K2, sphingolipids, fatty acids, and glycine [165].

Regarding lipid metabolism, there is a complex bidirectional interaction between hyperlipidemia and gut flora dysbiosis during pregnancy. Studies have noted disrupted gut microbiota in pregnant women with hyperlipidemia. In 2023, research showed lower α‐diversity in dyslipidemic pregnant women, with genera like Alistipes and Bacteroides negatively correlated with serum triglyceride (TG) levels, potentially reducing dyslipidemia risk. Additionally, the gut microbiota, combined with blood biochemical profile in the second trimester, could predict the risk of dyslipidemia in the third trimester [166]. Furthermore, both animal and human studies have shown that maternal obesity can alter the gut microbiota of both the mother and offspring [167]. On the other hand, gut microbiota dysbiosis can significantly affect lipid metabolism during pregnancy. In hyperlipidemia cohorts during pregnancy, several bacteria were correlated with blood lipid levels, where a lower abundance of Faecalibacterium was associated with increased TG levels, and higher levels of Streptococcus and Actinomyces genera were positively linked to higher total cholesterol (TC) levels [168]. Faecalibacterium's major metabolite, butyric acid, can prevent pregnancy‐induced obesity and hyperlipidemia caused by a high‐fat diet, thereby reducing metabolic disruption [169]. Two meta‐analyses of relevant randomized controlled trials (RCTs) also indicated that probiotic interventions with Lactobacillus spp. and Bifidobacterium spp. can significantly reduce TC and TG levels and have a substantial effect in reducing the risk of early GDM [170, 171]. Future research and clinical practice should focus on using gut microbiota modulation to treat mild hypertension and dyslipidemia in early to mid‐pregnancy, aiming to lower the risk of related pregnancy complications.

Sepsis

Sepsis is a fatal multiple‐organ dysfunction caused by an uncontrolled inflammatory response to infection [172]. Pregnancy elevates the risk of developing more severe sepsis, which may lead to serious complications such as PE and stands as a leading cause of maternal morbidity and mortality worldwide [173].

During pregnancy, bacterial infections may arise from various causes including the exist of a specific bacteria, an imbalance in the microbiomes, or the spread of bacteria from the gut. Common causes include Group B Streptococcus, from Streptococcus agalactiae in the gastrointestinal and genital areas, causing urinary and bladder infections [174]. Additionally, pregnant women and newborns are at a higher risk for listeriosis compared to nonpregnant women [175]. This condition stems from the L. monocytogenes bacterium, commonly acquired through the ingestion of food tainted with the pathogen. Both of the mentioned bacterial infections can lead to severe maternal and newborn sepsis [175]. Recent studies have linked maternal sepsis to gut microbiota dysbiosis. For instance, Chen et al. found that transplanting fecal microbiota from pregnant subjects induced an enhanced inflammatory response, hastening mortality in nonpregnant septic mice [176].

Mechanistically, gut dysbiosis during pregnancy reduces Parabacteroides merdae and its metabolite formononetin levels. This activates the hnRNPUL2–NLRP3 axis and triggers excessive macrophage pyroptosis in sepsis, impairing bacterial clearance and enhancing inflammation, thereby increasing sepsis susceptibility [176]. This study reveals that microbiome–immune interactions are implicated in the pathogenesis of maternal sepsis, offering new strategies for the precision approach of sepsis in pregnancy.

ADVERSE PREGNANCY OUTCOMES

FGR

FGR is defined as the inability of a fetus to achieve its genetic growth potential [177]. These infants are more prone to hypertension, diabetes, obesity, and other diseases in adulthood [178]. The underlying mechanisms and long‐term effects of FGR are not fully understood. Many studies have identified significant gut microbiota alterations between FGR patients and women with normal pregnancies. Specifically, an increased abundance of several butyrate‐producing genera, such as Bacteroides, Faecalibacterium, and Lachnospira, has been observed in FGR patients [179]. A large‐scale study involving 6348 pregnant women revealed a correlation between Helicobacter pylori infection and FGR [180]. Yang et al. uncovered that the FGR‐related adverse intrauterine environmental factors had a more significant impact on bacterial diversity and early gut microbiota composition than genetic factors, with this impact positively correlating with the severity of twin FGR [181]. In FGR neonates, they found reduced Enterococcus and Acinetobacter and lower fecal methionine and cysteine levels, important for physical and neurocognitive development. Surprisingly, this study observed a significantly increased abundance of butyrate producer Oscillospira and Coprococcusin in twins with FGR [181]. The finding of increased butyric acid‐producing bacteria in mothers and fetuses with FGR challenges the conventional wisdom, as butyrate is generally beneficial for regulating glucose metabolism and reducing inflammation [182]. While many studies report a lack of these bacteria in various diseases, their enrichment in FGR cases suggests a potential compensatory mechanism for intrauterine malnutrition. Additionally, gut Roseomonas and Propionibacteriaceae were significantly positively associated with placental and newborn birth weight, whereas Sphingomonas and Marinisporobacter were significantly negatively correlated with neonatal body mass index and birth weight [183]. According to the metabolism pathway analysis, the functions of the aforementioned differential gut bacteria are closely connected to glucose and nitrogen metabolism [183]. Studies involving FMT and specific dietary interventions suggest an important role for gut microbes in the prevention and treatment of FGR (Figure 3) [184].

PTB

PTB, defined as childbirth occurring before 37 weeks of gestation [185], is linked to breakdown in maternal–fetal tolerance, vascular diseases, cervical insufficiency, PROM, and intrauterine infections [186]. Studies have linked gut microbiota to PTB. In a prospective cohort study of Japanese mother–child dyads, Shiozaki et al. found significant gut microbiota alterations at 28 weeks gestation in mothers with preterm infants compared to full‐term infants. In the PTB group, Clostridium and Bacteroides were significantly reduced, while Lactobacillales was markedly elevated [187]. Clostridia spp. and Bacteroides are potent inducers of Treg cell proliferation and activation. Gut‐derived Treg cells can prevent PTB by suppressing inflammation through IL‐10 production [188]. Hiltunen et al. analyzed the gut microbiota of 55 preterm neonates, 25 full‐term neonates, and 51 mothers and also found that the initial gut microbiota of preterm infants differed significantly from full‐term counterparts [189]. Another prospective cohort study by Dahl et al. observed a reduction in gut microbiota diversity in PTB women, with lower abundance of Clostridiales, Bifidobacterium, and Streptococcus [53]. Many Bifidobacterium species have anti‐inflammatory properties and inhibit LPS‐induced nuclear factor‐κB activation, IL‐8, and cyclooxygenase‐2 production [188]. Therefore, these findings suggest that a decrease in Clostridiales and Bifidobacterium may increase susceptibility to inflammation or infection‐induced PTB (Figure 3).

Both FGR and PTB are conditions closely linked to malnutrition. In low‐ and middle‐income countries, maternal flora changes correlate with pregnancy outcomes and birth weight [190]. Infants with FGR are at an increased risk of PTB [191]. As previously mentioned, diet significantly influences the gut microbiota of pregnant women, thereby impacting pregnancy outcomes. For instance, a diet that is poor in quality, low in fiber, and high in fat can decrease the α‐diversity of the maternal gut microbiota, which is related to SPTB [192]. Moreover, levels of docosahexaenoic acid and eicosapentaenoic acid were significantly elevated in the feces of SPTB patients. Therefore, the decreased α‐diversity and the increase in omega‐3 fatty acid levels in the feces of pregnant women might function as predictive biomarkers for SPTB [192].

Until now, the causality between the aforementioned alterations in gut microbiota and FGR and PTB remains unconfirmed. Therefore, future research should conduct longitudinal studies on mothers experiencing FGR and PTB who maintain balanced diets. Systematic examination of probiotic supplementation or FMT from these donors is crucial to assess their microbiota's causal effect on pregnancy outcomes.

POTENTIAL OF GUT MICROBIOTA IN DIAGNOSING PREGNANCY COMPLICATIONS

Numerous studies have proposed gut microbiota dysbiosis as a potent biomarker for disease. In a prospective study, Israeli researchers developed a model comprising clinical indicators, gut microbiota, and inflammation factors based on the data of 394 first‐trimester pregnant women. This model can accurately predict GDM risk and offers potential for early identification and prevention for GDM, thereby mitigating potential risks to both mother and fetus. Among these parameters, gut microbiota changes, increased serum IL‐6 level, and reduced SCFA and branched SCFA levels in feces are suggested as potential early biomarkers of GDM [193]. Our previous study assessed the diagnostic value of gut microbiota and SCFA in PE. The diagnostic accuracy of PE reached 89.7% based on the abundance of intestinal Akkermansia and Oscillibacter. When combined with serum propionic and butyric acid levels, systolic and diastolic blood pressure, and urinary protein, the diagnostic efficacy increased to 98.98% [137]. Another study reported an area under the receiver‐operating characteristic curve (AUC) of 0.764 for a diagnostic model of PE based on Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomics Orthology of gut microbiota [194]. In addition, SCFAs exhibit diagnostic potential for PE and can serve as diagnostic biomarkers for ICP, with an AUC of 0.968 for hexanoic acid. Isobutyric and valeric acids are potential biomarkers for GDM, with isobutyric acid having an AUC of 0.764 [195]. These gut microbiota‐associated indicators provide a convenient approach for diagnosing pregnancy complications.

However, it is crucial to acknowledge the ongoing debate concerning the value of gut microbiota as disease diagnostic markers. Some studies argue that specific gut bacteria cannot predict the occurrence of pregnancy complications [196]. Furthermore, numerous challenges and limitations exist. For instance, inconsistencies in gut bacterial profiles of the same disease across studies raise questions about their diagnostic reliability. Moreover, factors such as individual variation, geographical location, dietary habits, and ethnicity significantly influence gut microbiota. Consequently, gut microbiota markers identified in small, region‐specific studies may not be universally applicable. However, to date, only a few meta‐analyses and small‐sample studies have explored the generalizability of healthy gut microbiota baselines and disease models across different geographical populations. In addition to factors such as location and diet, differences in sample collection, preparation, sequencing, and data analysis methods contribute to significant variability in results.

Therefore, to establish a reliable diagnostic model for pregnancy complications based on changes in gut microbiota, the above‐mentioned issues must be addressed. Solutions could involve regionalized studies, extensive sampling, standardized experimental protocols, feasibility screening of gut microbial markers (eliminating gut bacteria known to be susceptible to factors such as diet and geography and selecting those with relatively stable abundance in population), and combination with other clinical indices. Additionally, for diseases with reliable diagnostic indicators, the focus should shift toward evaluating the potential of gut microbiota in early detection and prognostic prediction.

POTENTIAL OF GUT MICROECOLOGICAL THERAPY FOR PREGNANCY COMPLICATIONS

Probiotics

Probiotics, active microorganisms beneficial to health when consumed in adequate amounts, have been used to treat pregnancy complications (Figure 5) [197]. Daily administration of Lactobacillus acidophilus, Lactobacillus casei, L. fermentum, and Bifidobacterium bifidum during mid‐pregnancy can significantly ameliorate insulin resistance and dysregulated lipid metabolism in GDM patients [198, 199]. A correlation has been observed between the intake of lactic acid bacteria products and a decreased incidence of PE [200]. However, the effectiveness of probiotics is debated. A double‐blind RCT showed that even if used from the early phase of the second trimester, probiotics were ineffective in preventing GDM among overweight and obese pregnant women [201]. Several meta‐analyses also hinted at the lack of substantial evidence supporting the significant impact of probiotic intake during pregnancy on fasting plasma glucose, PTB risk, or any other adverse maternal or neonatal outcomes [202, 203, 204]. These conflicting results may be attributed to discrepancies in the species of probiotics used, the duration and dosage of treatment, and the severity of the patients' conditions across different studies, underscoring the necessity for standardization of experimental factors in gut microbiota research.

Figure 5 Potential gut microbe‐based treatment for pregnancy complications. Schematic illustration of current potential strategies to improve pregnancy complications by manipulating the gut microbiota, including prebiotics, probiotics, fecal microbiota transplantation, phage therapy, engineered bacteria, and proteins and metabolites.

Prebiotics

Prebiotics and pregnancy complications

Prebiotics, a class of dietary fibers not easily digested or absorbed by humans but beneficial for gut bacteria growth and activity, are gaining attention for their potential to treat and prevent pregnancy complications (Figure 5). Several studies suggest prebiotics may reduce GDM, hypertension, and other complications by fostering a healthy gut microbiome and reducing inflammation [205]. Prebiotic supplementation during pregnancy, such as oligogalactose, can modify gut microbiota, increasing Bacteroidetes and SCFAs, decreasing Firmicutes, and creating an immune‐tolerant uterine environment. This can lower allergy and autoimmune disease risks in offspring [206]. Maternal obesity, a risk factor for offspring obesity, may be mitigated by prebiotics like polydextrose, restoring gut microbiome balance and enhancing skeletal muscle mitochondrial function in offspring [207]. Dietary modifications exert positive effects on the homeostasis of host gut microbiota. The intake of high‐fiber or high‐protein diets during pregnancy and lactation differentially affects the expression of satiety hormones and genes related to glucose and lipid metabolism in offspring, thereby influencing the risk of obesity, insulin resistance, and other metabolic disorders [208]. Additionally, the inclusion of free amino acids in diets can influence the composition and metabolic functions of microbiota, which in turn has implications for the health of the host. This suggests that AAs could be considered a new type of prebiotic, potentially labeled as “aminobiotics” [209]. Nevertheless, further research is necessary to confirm these findings and to determine optimal dosage and timing of prebiotic supplementation to effectively prevent pregnancy complications. While generally safe, prebiotics may cause bloating and other gastrointestinal side effects.

Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM)

Many traditional Chinese herbs rich in bioactive compounds, proteins, and polysaccharides, are considered prebiotic and significantly impact gut microbiota, potentially explaining their therapeutic effects [210].

Gan Cao, scientifically known as Glycyrrhiza uralensis Fisch., contains the primary component diammonium glycyrrhizinate, which can effectively regulate the gut microbiota. It reduces endotoxin‐producing bacteria such as Desulfovibrio and increases SCFA‐producing probiotics such as Lactobacillus and Ruminococcaceae. Such restoration of gut microbiota helps protect mice from nonalcoholic fatty liver disease [211]. Given that patients with GDM often have increased Desulfovibrio and decreased Lactobacillus in the gut, Gan Cao might counter these detrimental changes, offering potential benefits for GDM treatment [121, 122].

Huang Qi, scientifically known as Astragalus membranaceus, has emerged as a notable candidate for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) treatment. Recent research demonstrates that Huang Qi effectively rectifies disorders in glucose and lipid metabolism in streptozotocin‐induced T2DM mice, mitigates inflammation and oxidative stress, and minimizes organ damage. Its hypoglycemic and hypolipidemic properties may be ascribed to its capacity to remodel the specific gut microbiome. Specifically, Huang Qi suppresses intestinal pathogens like Shigella and boosts beneficial bacteria such as Allobaculum and Lactobacillus, aiding gut barrier repair [212]. Furthermore, Huang Qi has been found to significantly alleviate diabetes symptoms in db/db model mice, concurrently restoring the balance of their gut microbial community and enhancing SCFA levels. The rise in gut bacteria like Akkermansia and Bacteroides correlates positively with its hypoglycemic effects and the production of SCFAs in the feces. Mechanistically, the SCFA boost induced by Huang Qi upregulates GPR41/43 and tight junction proteins like occludin and zona occludens 1, stimulates GLP‐1 secretion, and improves intestinal integrity, thus effectively alleviating diabetes symptoms in mice [213]. These investigations elucidate the intricate interplay between Huang Qi‐regulated gut microbiota and its effects on glucose and lipid metabolism.

Dan Shen, identified scientifically as Salvia miltiorrhiza, has been shown to markedly enhance the structure of gut microbiota, specifically by increasing the abundance of Akkermansia, A. muciniphila, and Lactobacillus intestinalis in SHR rats. These microbiotic alterations are potentially linked to Dan Shen's multifaceted therapeutic roles, including its anti‐inflammatory, antiplatelet aggregation, vasodilatory, and antioxidative stress activities [214]. Intriguingly, in patients with PE, there is a notable decrease in the abundance of Akkermansia and A. muciniphila in the gut [137]. This observation suggests a potential preventive role for Dan Shen in the context of PE.

Ling Zhi (Ganoderma lucidum)'s water extract has a significant effect against obesity, maintaining gut barrier integrity, reducing ME, and lowering the expression and secretion of proinflammatory cytokines (such as TNF, IL‐1β, and IL‐6). It also improves glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity, and these effects are closely related to its regulation of the gut microbiota. For example, transferring fecal microbiota from Ling Zhi‐treated mice to those on a high‐fat diet replicates the weight loss effect of Ling Zhi [210]. These insights highlight the vital role of gut microbiota regulation in the effectiveness of these TCM treatments.

Currently, there are no reported studies on the relationship between TCM, gut microbiota, and pregnancy complications. However, the mentioned literature already demonstrates the importance of gut microbiota as intermediaries in the regulation of glucose, lipids, and blood pressure by TCM, suggesting a promising potential for TCM in treating pregnancy complications by modulating gut microbiota.

Fermented foods and beverages

Fermented foods and beverages can be defined as foods made through desired microbial growth and enzymatic conversions of food components [215]. Typical probiotic‐rich fermented foods often encompass yogurt, kefir, kombucha, sauerkraut, pickles, miso, tempeh, kimchi, sourdough bread, and various cheeses. Yogurt, as a popular probiotic food, typically contains probiotic counts ranging from 90 to 500 billion colony‐forming units (CFUs) per serving. The health benefits of these foods arise from the probiotics they contain, the transformation of elements like biologically active peptides, biogenic amines, and phenolic compounds during fermentation, and the reduction of nutrient absorption inhibitors.

The effects of certain fermented foods on gut health, such as kefir, sauerkraut, natto, and sourdough bread, have been examined in RCTs. Kefir, in particular, a well‐studied fermented product, is scientifically recognized for significantly improving lactose intolerance and aiding in H. pylori eradication [215, 216]. However, broader clinical evidence on the effects of most fermented foods on gastrointestinal health and disease prevention remains limited.

Existing research has explored the cardioprotective effects of fermented dairy products containing live microorganisms [217]. Meta‐analyses of prospective studies suggest a moderate inverse relationship between overall dairy consumption and cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk. However, findings on fermented dairy products like yogurt and cheese are inconsistent, leading to ongoing debates among researchers [218]. In contrast, numerous studies have shown the benefits of fermented foods and beverages without live microorganisms in CVD prevention [217].

According to the above results, the impact of fermented foods and beverages on human health remains uncertain; further cohort studies and RCTs are essential to verify their effects on various diseases. However, growing studies on fermented foods in gastrointestinal and CVD contexts show promise in reducing blood pressure and cholesterol levels, offering insights for potential use in managing pregnancy‐related complications.

Research is relatively scarce in the field of maternal and child health. A new research indicates that a traditional fermented food known as injera, commonly made in Ethiopia, might play a role in enhancing the diversity of gut bacteria in Ethiopian infants. These bacteria, not typically found in the human microbiome, are likely introduced into the infants' system through the consumption of such fermented foods [219]. This suggests the potential of fermented foods in shaping the gut microbiota of both mothers and infants.

RCTs of prebiotics

RCTs are crucial for determining the actual effectiveness of prebiotics. In 12 out of 15 RCTs, adding prebiotics like galacto‐oligosaccharide (GOS) and fructo‐oligosaccharide (FOS) to infant formula (IF) has led to increased fecal Bifidobacterium levels [220]. A recent RCT showed that GOS intervention modified the gut microbiota in pregnant women without impacting glycolipid metabolism and clinical indices [221]. Therefore, the dietary supplementation of prebiotics during pregnancy requires further clinical investigation. Future studies should maintain consistency in microbial assessments and thoroughly document the composition of solid foods introduced during interventions.

Synbiotics

Synbiotics, a combination of prebiotics and probiotics (Figure 5), boost beneficial gut bacteria growth and help maintain a healthy gut microbiota [222]. A synbiotic capsule containing L. acidophilus (5 × 1010 CFU/g), Lactobacillus plantarum (1.5 × 1010 CFU/g), Lactobacillus fermentum (7 × 109 CFU/g), Lactobacillus gasseri (2 × 1010 CFU/g), and 38.5 mg of FOS, when administered for 6 weeks to GDM patients, can significantly ameliorate oxidative stress and abnormal lipid metabolism without affecting insulin sensitivity [223]. Conversely, another synbiotic with inulin alleviated insulin resistance and oxidative stress [224]. Additionally, dietary intervention with fish oil and probiotics can increase the abundance of Bifidobacterium and decrease the abundance of Haemophilus parainfluenzae, Veillonella parvula, and Eggerthella lenta in the gut microbiota of healthy pregnant women [196]. These effects might be due to the promotion of adherence and colonization of probiotic bacteria in the gut by fish oil [225]. However, some studies found no reduction in GDM incidence with fish oil and probiotics [196]. These contradictory results emphasize the need for further large‐scale clinical studies to better understand the role and therapeutic value of synbiotics in pregnancy complications.

FMT

FMT involves transplanting fecal matter from a healthy donor into a patient's gastrointestinal tract (Figure 5). It has been successful in treating intestinal disorders like Clostridium difficile infection, IBD, and irritable bowel syndrome [226, 227]. Additionally, newborns delivered by cesarean section can re‐establish their gut microbiota through FMT using postnatal maternal microbiota [228]. Nonetheless, the potential of FMT in treating and preventing pregnancy complications remains underexplored to date. Although FMT offers a broader spectrum of probiotics compared to probiotic therapy, challenges include obtaining healthy donors, unstable efficacy, the high risk of transmitting infections, and unknown long‐term effects on pregnant women and newborns. Increasing evidence suggests that an advanced technique known as WMT, which employs microfiltration to eliminate fecal particles, parasite eggs, and fungi during the preparation of samples, offers a more accurate, manageable, and secure method compared to traditional FMT [229]. Studies have shown that WMT sourced from healthy individuals can effectively lower blood pressure in hypertensive patients [230].

Therefore, in light of the uniqueness of pregnant women and fetuses, we recommend that future research should focus on the following aspects: First, the use of rapid and precise metagenomic sequencing methods to thoroughly assess the infection risk of donors and their compatibility with the recipient's microbiota. Second, the optimization of the preparation, delivery, and storage methods for FMT, while eliminating the influence of toxins and other hazardous substances, to minimize potential risks to both the mother and infant. Third, conducting comparative analyses between FMT and alternative approaches such as WMT. Lastly, conducting more multicenter, double‐blind RCTs to assess the safety and efficacy of FMT during pregnancy, especially among pregnant women in different gestational periods and with diverse backgrounds.

Phage therapy

Recent animal studies suggest that broad‐spectrum antibiotics can adversely affect fetal health by disrupting gut microbiota and metabolic pathways [231]. They also negatively impact neurodevelopment, including reduced neuron numbers in the hippocampus, smaller astrocytes, impaired neuron growth in the dentate gyrus, and loss of hippocampal synapses, potentially affecting early cognitive development in children [232]. Moreover, antibiotic treatment in pregnant mice can alter immune cell distribution, like increasing splenic Th1 cells and activated blood monocytes, while reducing Th2, Th17, and double‐positive FoxP3/RoRgT cells in the Peyer's patches and mesenteric lymph nodes, disrupting maternal immune regulation [233]. Early childhood exposure to certain broad‐spectrum antibiotics may increase the risk of overweight, though this link does not persist into later childhood [234]. Given these findings, assessing the risks and benefits of antibiotic therapy during pregnancy is crucial. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) published the “Pregnancy and Lactation Labeling Rule” to provide detailed guidance for healthcare professionals and patients about the use of prescription drugs and biologics during pregnancy and lactation, helping to understand drug safety [235, 236]. Antibiotics indiscriminately kill both beneficial and harmful bacteria, and their overuse can lead to the emergence of drug‐resistant strains.

Facing the growing problem of bacterial resistance and the rise of superbugs, the medical field is re‐evaluating phage therapy—a treatment that can precisely target specific host bacteria without disrupting the overall microbial balance. In 2020, a patient with sepsis from diabetic foot ulcers was treated unsuccessfully with the heaviest hitting cocktails in the antibacterial arsenal for a multidrug‐resistant infection. As a final measure, doctors chose to administer over one billion viral particles intravenously, which improved his condition and cleared the carbapenem‐resistant Acinetobacter baumannii respiratory infection [237]. Phage therapy, as a complement to antibiotic treatment, offers a precise antibacterial strategy and brings new hope for combating drug‐resistant infections (Figure 5). Therefore, the use of antibiotics during pregnancy should be approached with caution, considering their type, mechanism of action, genetic toxicity, safety during pregnancy, and potential long‐term adverse effects on the fetus [238]. While antibiotics have a significant impact on the gut microbiota, they should be used judiciously as a treatment option for pregnancy complications. Alternative and more precise methods, such as probiotics, prebiotics, and phage therapy, should be considered first.

Clinical trials of intestinal microecological therapy

Clinical trials for gut microecological therapy in pregnancy complications are limited, but promising results have emerged in other diseases. A 2021 phase 2 RCT revealed that a microbiota‐directed complementary food prototype (MDCF‐2) was more effective in improving weight‐for‐length and weight‐for‐age in young children with moderate acute malnutrition than standard ready‐to‐use food, highlighting its potential as a dietary supplement [239]. Additionally, three randomized, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled clinical trials demonstrated the therapeutic potential of RBX2660 (a fecal microbiota suspension) [240], SER‐109 (a combination of dozens of microbiota) [241], and VE303 (eight Clostridium strains) [242], which significantly reduced or prevented the recurrence of C. difficile infection with no adverse events.

In clinical trials, various intestinal microecological intervention approaches have their pros and cons. Dietary modifications and prebiotics are safe and easily prepared, yet the persistence of their effects and the specificity of targeted symbiotic bacterial strains still require further evaluation. Regarding symbiotic microbial consortia, they can screen the safety of known flora compositions and individual isolates. However, there are challenges in strain selection and cultivation, including potential mutations during cultivation, maintenance of bacterial functionality after long‐term cultivation, unexpected phenotypes from complex bacterial interactions, and the need to ensure phenotype, homogeneity, purity, and efficacy of the used bacteria. As for FMT, which integrates the benefits of an entire microbial community, concerns remain about the transmission of pathogens and virulence, as well as the variable efficacy that is heavily dependent on donor selection [243]. The determination of which methods will be widely adopted in the future is still an open question in the field.

Developing new therapies, especially live bacterial drugs, is a complex and costly process that involves many steps from strain cultivation to FDA approval. While preclinical studies can be conducted in standard laboratories, clinical trials of live bacteria must adhere to strict manufacturing regulations and require extensive and iterative studies of various living biological agents. These difficulties limit the development of novel therapies. Currently, these developments are primarily carried out by commercial entities [243].

To overcome these challenges, increased support from nonprofit organizations, such as governments, foundations, and charities, is needed. Furthermore, it is worth considering innovative research and development (R&D) models, such as public–private partnerships, which combine the implementation capabilities of commercial firms with the research capacities and resources of public organizations (e.g., laboratories), thereby enhancing R&D efficiency.

THE DEBATE ON “STERILE WOMB” AND “IN UTERO COLONIZATION”

Sterile womb

Historically, it was believed that fetuses develop in a sterile environment. In 1885, Theodor Escherich reported no viable microbes in meconium [244]. Subsequent studies in 1927 and 1934 demonstrated negative bacterial cultures in meconium samples from 62% of healthy pregnant women [245, 246]. Another study in 1927 found that all amniotic fluid from women who had been in labor for less than 6 h tested negative for bacteria, while that from women who had been in labor for more than 6 h tested positive [247]. Subsequent research largely upheld the sterile uterus concept [248, 249, 250]. Although some research has reported a significant increase in the bacterial positivity rate of meconium in pregnancy complications, such as PROM [251, 252, 253], PTB [254, 255], PE [256], and FGR [257], a total of 68% of meconium samples still tested negative for bacteria even when combining culture, PCR, and sequencing techniques. Further, a 2016 study found that the bacterial DNA isolated from placental samples was indistinguishable from the bacterial DNA present in DNA extraction kits, and its abundance was too low to determine whether it was a true signal or contamination [258]. A comprehensive 2019 study mostly attributed positive bacterial signals in placental samples to contamination, although Streptococcus lactis, a neonatal sepsis pathogen, was identified in 5% of the predelivery samples [259]. In 2023, a study published in Nature conducted a thorough analysis of the data from prominent studies by Rackaityte et al. and Mishra et al. (as mentioned in the “In utero colonization” section). This study refuted the concept of utero colonization. It concluded that microbial signals in fetal samples likely result from contamination during clinical procedures or DNA extraction and sequencing. Furthermore, live microbes thriving in healthy fetal tissues contradict fundamental concepts of immunology, clinical microbiology, and the generation of germ‐free animals [260]. On the other hand, some researchers believe that the so‐called “placental microbiota” might originate from the vagina, as some bacteria identified in the placenta are identical to those in the vagina. In 2021, Sterpu et al. also found that more bacteria could be cultured from the placentas following vaginal delivery than from cesarean delivery [261]. All in all, these studies suggest that while the placenta may harbor pathogens, it is highly unlikely for a stable bacterial community to be pervasive in a normal placenta, implying that a healthy uterus is sterile. If bacteria are detected, it is more likely due to contamination during the delivery process or in the laboratory environment (Table 1).

Table 1 Timeline of the “sterile womb” hypothesis.

Year	Sterile womb	References	
1885	No viable bacteria was detected in the meconium	[244]	
1927	Amniotic fluid bacterial culture: labor under 6 h (−), labor over 6 h (+)	[247]	
1927–1934	Cultures of meconium samples are bacteria‐free	[245, 246]	
1962–1976	Sterile amniotic cavity: positive cultures attributed to collection contamination	[248, 249, 250]	
1982	Bacteria in meconium, placental and amniotic fluid: (−) in healthy cohort; (+) in partly PROM patients via Gram stain, IF and culture	[251]	
1986–1990	Echoing 1982 findings: Bacteria (−) in healthy cohort; (+) in part of PROM patients	[252, 253]	
2008–2013	Despite the detection of bacteria (+) in various pregnancy complications such as PTB, PE, and FGR via methods like PCR, staining, or culture, the total detection rate remains low	[254, 255, 256, 257]	
2016	Low abundance of bacterial DNA sequencing in the placenta is linked to contamination from extraction kits	[258]	
2019	No microbiome in placental samples; most signals are from labor/delivery or lab contamination	[259]	
2021	16S rRNA sequencing cannot distinguish between bacteria in the placenta and lab contaminants; skin and vaginal bacteria predominate in placental cultures.	[261]	
2023	Microbial signals could be due to contamination from clinical handling or DNA processing steps	[260]	
Abbreviations: FGR, fetal growth restriction; IF, immunofluorescence; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PE, pre‐eclampsia; PROM, premature rupture of membranes; PTB, preterm birth; rRNA, ribosomal RNA.

John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

In utero colonization

Recent DNA sequencing advancements have enabled the detection of previously unculturable microorganisms. In 2013, Indira Mysorekar found that nearly one‐third of 200 placenta sections examined under a microscope contained bacteria [262]. In a representative study conducted in 2014, researchers sequenced the whole genomes of placentas from over 300 women under sterile conditions, uncovering a sparse bacterial community in the placenta resembling oral bacteria, different from those in other body parts [263]. This finding challenges the conventional view that neonates acquire their microbiota through birth, suggesting instead that oral bacteria might enter the placenta via the bloodstream. Since then, numerous studies have reported the possibility of microbial presence in the placenta. For instance, Gomez‐Arango et al. supported the “oral origin” hypothesis of the infant microbiome and suggested a gut microbiome contribution [264]. Other research indicates that placental bacterial signatures are independent of delivery method and contamination during delivery, suggesting prebirth bacterial presence [265]. Parnell et al. further demonstrated the spatial heterogeneity in the distribution of microbial communities within the placenta [266]. In addition, they used various methods, including Warthin–Starry staining, Gram staining, in situ hybridization of bacterial ribosomal RNA (rRNA), fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and clinical culture, and confirmed the presence of microbes in the placenta [267, 268]. All these studies indicate bacterial colonization in the uterus during a healthy pregnancy, although with extremely low abundance and diversity.

Recently, Rackaityte et al. identified small bacterial populations in meconium, including Micrococcaceae and Lactobacillus, using 16S rRNA sequencing, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and FISH. They further isolated Micrococcus luteus, a bacterium that thrives in fetal intestine‐like environments and enhances the recruitment of immune cells [269]. Mishra et al. subsequently corroborated the widespread presence of Lactobacillus and Staphylococcus in various tissues. They also reported T‐cell activation in fetal tissues, suggesting antigenic stimulation before birth. These findings strongly support in utero bacteria presence and potential fetal immune system priming [270]. In 2022, La et al. used 16S sequencing to suggest that the placenta might contain trace amounts of microbiota, with notable variations in its dominant species linked to different adverse pregnancy outcomes [271]. In 2023, Stupak et al. detected bacterial proteins in placentas with late FGR and controls using liquid chromatography‐electrospray ionization‐tandem mass spectrometry technology [272]. A review article published in Gut in 2023 also argued that the initial encounters with microbes may already occur in the womb, preparing for interaction with a bacteria‐rich environment at the time of delivery [273]. Nevertheless, contamination in low biomass samples such as placenta, uterus, and fetal tissue remains an unavoidable and urgent problem (Table 2).

Table 2 Timeline of the “in utero colonization” hypothesis.

Year	In utero colonization	Reference	
2013	Morphological indications of bacteria in 26% of healthy deliveries, higher in preterm: Evidence from placental basal plate paraffin sections	[262]	
2014	16S rRNA sequencing and WGS metagenomic studies reveal a unique placental microbiome that closely resembles the human oral microbiome	[263]	
2017	(1) Placental microbes mirror oral microbes, with both oral and gut sources seeding the placenta, suggesting diverse origins for placental colonization and (2) the placental microbiota exhibits niche specificity	[264, 266]	
2019	16S rRNA sequencing, FISH, staining, and culture reveal bacterial presence in utero compartment and fetal Intestine	[267, 268]	
2020	16S rRNA sequencing, SEM, and FISH reveal a limited microbiota in fetal meconium, dominated by Micrococcaceae and Lactobacillus. Micrococcus luteus is isolated, exhibiting unique growth patterns in in utero‐like intestinal conditions	[269]	
2021	Staphylococcus and Lactobacillus in fetal tissues activate memory T cells in fetal mesenteric lymph nodes, demonstrating the importance of microbial exposure in fetal immune priming	[270]	
2022	16S rRNA sequencing shows the placenta has trace microbiota, varying with pregnancy complications	[271]	
2023	LC‐ESI‐MS/MS technology detected many bacterial proteins in placentas from both healthy controls and pregnancies with late FGR	[272]	
Abbreviations: FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; LC‐ESI‐MS/MS, liquid chromatography‐electrospray ionization‐tandem mass spectrometry; rRNA, ribosomal RNA; SEM, scanning electron microscopy; WGS, whole‐genome sequencing.

John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Solution

Despite growing evidence suggesting the existence of uterine microbes, concerns about experimental contamination persist. Addressing this issue is critical for elucidating the roles of gut microbiota in the regulation of uteroplacental function and in the pathogenesis of pregnancy complications, as well as for determining the timeline of microbiome origin in newborns.

Given that various pregnancy complications are associated with infections, we therefore propose several recommendations: (1) Strict adherence to aseptic practices. Minimizing contamination during sample collection, transportation, and handling is paramount. Possible strategies include collecting samples from within tissues and using sterile tools and equipment; (2) use of appropriate controls in analyses. Sterile water and placentas from germ‐free animals can serve as negative controls, while samples from confirmed cases of uterine infection can serve as positive controls; (3) ensure all samples are subjected to the same experimental procedure. Employing multiple kits or sequencing companies is essential to determine the inherent background noise of the detection system, thereby reducing the false positive rate; (4) combine culture‐independent techniques (e.g., 16S rRNA gene sequencing, metagenomic sequencing, FISH, histological methods, SEM) with culture‐dependent techniques for bacterial identification and activity assessment; and (5) ascertaining the true origin of intrauterine microbiota, which could be natural or a result of diseases like endometritis or bacterial vaginosis. Are they derived from the evolution of life? Are they a result of the translocation of oral or gut microbiota via the bloodstream or ascending from the vagina? Is the detected signal simply from bacterial fragments? Do bacteria truly colonize the uterus or only reside transiently?

In summary, whether a healthy uterus harbors a microbial community remains an unresolved question. If microbes are indeed present, understanding their origins, the timeline of colonization, and functional characteristics becomes essential. Answering these questions is crucial for determining whether microbes directly influence maternal health through their structural components, such as flagella, or indirectly through their metabolites in the bloodstream. It is also pivotal for elucidating the origins of the fetal microbiome and immune system.

OTHER NONBACTERIAL GUT MICROBIOTA AND PREGNANCY COMPLICATIONS

Metagenomic sequencing technologies have enabled the examination of nonbacterial microbiota in the human gut, especially gut viruses and fungi, apart from bacteria [274]. Studies have reported changes in the abundance of certain viruses associated with GDM in neonatal meconium. Gut fungi are also suspected to be intricately related to the metabolic status of patients with GDM. For instance, Penicillium, Ganoderma, Fusarium, Chaetomium, and Heterobasidion are significantly enriched in healthy pregnant women, whereas Hanseniaspora, Torulaspora, Auricularia, Alternaria, and Candida are significantly enriched in patients with GDM. Moreover, a significant negative relationship between blood glucose levels and intestinal Ganoderma has been found [275]. Nonetheless, compared to gut microbiota, our understanding of the changes, roles, and mechanisms of gut viruses and fungi in pregnancy complications remains largely uncharted. Surprisingly, current research on the virome is beginning to emerge, and fecal virome transplantation (FVT) has been found to be capable of altering the gut microbiota, improving glucose tolerance and obesity phenotypes [276, 277]. Transferring fecal virome enhances the proliferation of A. muciniphila in the gut and, surprisingly, increases the fertility rate in mice [278]. Therefore, future efforts should focus on exploring the versatile roles and therapeutic mechanisms of viruses, fungi, and their combinations in various pregnancy complications. Aiming to effectively combine these elements for advanced FMT and microbiota‐based therapies is a novel and promising prospect.

Additionally, we recommend the following directions for future research in gut microbiota studies: (1) Utilize a multiomics approach, combining metagenomics, metaviromics, metatranscriptomics, and metaproteomics, along with single‐bacteria‐level sequencing methods, to investigate interactions within and between different bacterial/viral species, as well as their mutual regulation with the host [279, 280]; (2) develop high‐throughput experimental methods that can efficiently and accurately identify the host bacteria of phages; (3) combine FVT and FMT to uncover causal relationships between abnormal gut viromes, gut bacteria, and diseases and to reveal the mutual regulation and mechanisms between gut viruses/phages and the gut microbiota; (4) employ various functional research methods to clarify the roles and mechanisms of specific phages and their host bacteria in the development of diseases, both in vitro and in vivo, and assess their value in disease diagnosis and treatment.

OUTLOOK

Accumulating evidence reveals the pivotal roles of gut microbiota in human health. Particularly during pregnancy, the species composition of gut microbiota and its metabolites (especially SCFAs) undergo significant dynamic changes as pregnancy progresses, potentially forming part of the physiological adaptation to gestation. Thus, gut microbiota dysbiosis plays a crucial role in the onset of pregnancy complications. These abnormalities provide unique and valuable insights for the diagnosis, early detection, and prognostic evaluation of pregnancy complications. Furthermore, focusing on gut microbe‐based interventions, such as probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics, FMT, WMT, and FVT, offers new options for treating pregnancy complications.

However, numerous factors, such as sample size, diet, geography, ethnicity, study methodology, and the complexity of disease pathogenesis, significantly influence our understanding gut microbiota's role in pregnancy complications, leading to ongoing debate about its exact functions. Some studies even report that interventions targeting gut microbiota have no significant improvement in the incidence or prognosis of pregnancy complications. To address these issues, it is necessary to carry out large‐scale RCTs to effectively control potential confounding factors. This approach will help clarify the relationship between gut microbiota and pregnancy complications and their potential diagnostic and therapeutic value.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Qunye Zhang offered valuable insights and supervision during the preparation of this manuscript. Zhenyu Tian wrote the manuscript. Zhenyu Tian and Qunye Zhang revised the manuscript. Xinjie Zhang, Guixiang Yao, Jiajia Jin, Tongxue Zhang, Chunhua Sun, and Zhe Wang critically evaluated and provided substantial suggestions for the manuscript. All authors have reviewed the final version and approved it for publication.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Supporting information

Table S1: Comprehensive list of β‐glucuronidases (GUS) sequences identified by Pollet et al. 2017 (DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2017.05.003) and reanalyzed by Candeliere et al. 2022 (DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.826994).

Table S2: List of representative LPS‐producing bacteria within the Proteobacteria phylum.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2021YFA1301102), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82170495; 82070820), and the Major Science and Technology Innovation Project of Shandong Province (2018CXGC1218).

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

This manuscript does not generate any code or data. Supporting information (tables, graphical abstract, slides, videos, Chinese translated version, and updated materials) may be found in the online DOI or iMeta Science http://www.imeta.science/.
==== Refs
REFERENCES

1 World Health Organization.  2023. Trends in Maternal Mortality 2000 to 2020: Estimates by WHO, UNICEF. UNFPA, World Bank Group and UNDESA/Population Division.
2 Mirzaei, Mohammadali Khan , and Corinne F. Maurice . 2017. “Ménage à trois in the Human Gut: Interactions Between Host, Bacteria and Phages.” Nature Reviews Microbiology 15 : 397–408. 10.1038/nrmicro.2017.30 28461690
3 Zhang, Chenguang , Huifeng Liu , Lei Sun , Yue Wang , Xiaodong Chen , Juan Du , Åsa Sjöling , Junhu Yao , and Shengru Wu . 2023. “An Overview of Host‐Derived Molecules That Interact With Gut Microbiota.” iMeta 2 : e88. 10.1002/imt2.88 38868433
4 Sender, Ron , Fuchs, Shai , and Ron Milo . 2016. “Are We Really Vastly Outnumbered? Revisiting the Ratio of Bacterial to Host Cells in Humans.” Cell 164 : 337–340. 10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.013 26824647
5 Abbott, Alison . 2016. “Scientists Bust Myth That Our Bodies Have more Bacteria Than Human Cells.” Nature 10 . 10.1038/nature.2016.19136
6 Wilmes, Paul , Camille Martin‐Gallausiaux , Marek Ostaszewski , Velma T. E. Aho , Polina V. Novikova , Cédric C. Laczny , and Jochen G. Schneider . 2022. “The Gut Microbiome Molecular Complex in Human Health and Disease.” Cell Host & Microbe 30 : 1201–1206. 10.1016/j.chom.2022.08.016 36108612
7 Zheng, Danping , Liwinski, Timur , and Eran Elinav . 2020. “Interaction Between Microbiota and Immunity in Health and Disease.” Cell Res 30 : 492–506. 10.1038/s41422-020-0332-7 32433595
8 Qi, Xinyu , Chuyu Yun , Yanli Pang , and Jie Qiao . 2021. “The Impact of the Gut Microbiota on the Reproductive and Metabolic Endocrine System.” Gut Microbes 13 : 1–21. 10.1080/19490976.2021.1894070
9 Gorczyca, Kamila , Aleksandra Obuchowska , Żaneta Kimber‐Trojnar , Magdalena Wierzchowska‐Opoka , and Bożena Leszczyńska‐Gorzelak . 2022. “Changes in the Gut Microbiome and Pathologies in Pregnancy.” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 19 : 9961. 10.3390/ijerph19169961 36011603
10 Turjeman, Sondra , Maria Carmen Collado and Omry Koren . 2021. “The Gut Microbiome in Pregnancy and Pregnancy Complications.” Current Opinion in Endocrine and Metabolic Research 18 : 133–138. 10.1016/j.coemr.2021.03.004
11 Soma‐Pillay, Priya , Catherine Nelson‐Piercy , Heli Tolppanen , and Alexandre Mebazaa . 2016. “Physiological Changes in Pregnancy.” Cardiovascular Journal of Africa 27 : 89–94. 10.5830/CVJA-2016-021 27213856
12 Förger, Frauke , and Peter M. Villiger . 2020. “Immunological Adaptations in Pregnancy That Modulate Rheumatoid Arthritis Disease Activity.” Nature Reviews Rheumatology 16 : 113–122. 10.1038/s41584-019-0351-2 31932747
13 Yockey, Laura J. , and Akiko Iwasaki . 2018. “Interferons and Proinflammatory Cytokines in Pregnancy and Fetal Development.” Immunity 49 : 397–412. 10.1016/j.immuni.2018.07.017 30231982
14 Vacca, Paola , Laura Chiossone , Maria Cristina Mingari , and Lorenzo Moretta . 2019. “Heterogeneity of NK Cells and other Innate Lymphoid Cells in Human and Murine Decidua.” Frontiers in Immunology 10 : 170. 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00170 30800126
15 Jena, Manoj K. , Neha Nayak , Kang Chen , and Nihar R. Nayak . 2019. “Role of Macrophages in Pregnancy and Related Complications.” Archivum Immunologiae et Therapiae Experimentalis 67 : 295–309. 10.1007/s00005-019-00552-7 31286151
16 Mor, Gil , Paulomi Aldo , and Ayesha B. Alvero . 2017. “The Unique Immunological and Microbial Aspects of Pregnancy.” Nature Reviews Immunology 17 : 469–482. 10.1038/nri.2017.64
17 Nancy, Patrice , Elisa Tagliani , Chin‐Siean Tay , Patrik Asp , David E. Levy , and Adrian Erlebacher . 2012. “Chemokine Gene Silencing in Decidual Stromal Cells Limits T Cell Access to the Maternal–Fetal Interface.” Science 336 : 1317–1321. 10.1126/science.1220030 22679098
18 Giaglis, Stavros , Maria Stoikou , Franco Grimolizzi , Bibin Y. Subramanian , Shane V. van Breda , Irene Hoesli , Olav Lapaire , Paul Hasler , Nandor Gabor Than , and Sinuhe Hahn . 2016. “Neutrophil Migration Into the Placenta: Good, Bad or Deadly?” Cell Adhesion & Migration 10 : 208–225. 10.1080/19336918.2016.1148866 26933824
19 Tian, Zhenyu , Yun Zhang , Zhijian Zheng , Meng Zhang , Tao Zhang , Jiajia Jin , Xinjie Zhang , et al. 2022. “Gut Microbiome Dysbiosis Contributes to Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm by Promoting Neutrophil Extracellular Trap Formation.” Cell Host & Microbe 30 : 1450–1463.e8. 10.1016/j.chom.2022.09.004 36228585
20 Sharma, Simran , Patricia R. S. Rodrigues , Summia Zaher , Luke C. Davies , and Peter Ghazal . 2022. “Immune‐Metabolic Adaptations in Pregnancy: A Potential Stepping‐Stone to Sepsis.” EBioMedicine 86 : 104337. 10.1016/j.ebiom.2022.104337 36470829
21 Miller, Caroline , Miriam McQuade , Julia MacCallum , and Y. Victoria Zhang . 2020. “Persistently Elevated hCG in a Patient With no Clear Evidence of Pregnancy.” Clinica Chimica Acta 510 : 703–706. 10.1016/j.cca.2020.09.004
22 Hendriks, Erin , Honor MacNaughton , and Maricela Castillo MacKenzie . 2019. “First Trimester Bleeding: Evaluation and Management.” American Family Physician 99 : 166–174. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30702252 30702252
23 Sykes, Lynne , and Phillip R. Bennett . 2018. “Efficacy of Progesterone for Prevention of Preterm Birth.” Best Practice & Research Clinical Obstetrics & Gynaecology 52 : 126–136. 10.1016/j.bpobgyn.2018.08.006 30266582
24 Noyola‐Martínez, Nancy , Ali Halhali , and David Barrera . 2019. “Steroid Hormones and Pregnancy.” Gynecological Endocrinology 35 : 376–384. 10.1080/09513590.2018.1564742 30793997
25 Zakaria, Zain Zaki , Shouq Al‐Rumaihi , Rana S. Al‐Absi , Huda Farah , Muram Elamin , Rahaf Nader , Salma Bouabidi , Sara Elgaili Suleiman , Shahd Nasr , and Maha Al‐Asmakh . 2022. “Physiological Changes and Interactions between Microbiome and the Host During Pregnancy.” Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 12 : 824925. 10.3389/fcimb.2022.824925 35265534
26 Koren, Omry , Julia K. Goodrich , Tyler C. Cullender , Aymé Spor , Kirsi Laitinen , Helene Kling Bäckhed , Antonio Gonzalez , et al. 2012. “Host Remodeling of the Gut Microbiome and Metabolic Changes During Pregnancy.” Cell 150 : 470–480. et al. 10.1016/j.cell.2012.07.008 22863002
27 Brändle, J. , K. J. Domig , and W. Kneifel . 2016. “Relevance and Analysis of Butyric Acid Producing Clostridia in Milk and Cheese.” Food Control 67 : 96–113. 10.1016/j.foodcont.2016.02.038
28 Lopetuso, Loris R. , Franco Scaldaferri , Valentina Petito , and Antonio Gasbarrini . 2013. “Commensal Clostridia: Leading Players in the Maintenance of Gut Homeostasis.” Gut Pathogens 5 : 23. 10.1186/1757-4749-5-23 23941657
29 Baldelli, Valerio , Franco Scaldaferri , Lorenza Putignani , and Federica Del Chierico . 2021. “The Role of Enterobacteriaceae in Gut Microbiota Dysbiosis in Inflammatory Bowel Diseases.” Microorganisms 9 : 697. 10.3390/microorganisms9040697 33801755
30 McIntyre, H. David , Patrick Catalano , Cuilin Zhang , Gernot Desoye , Elisabeth R. Mathiesen , and Peter Damm . 2019. “Gestational Diabetes Mellitus.” Nature Reviews Disease Primers 5 : 47. 10.1038/s41572-019-0098-8
31 Dimitriadis, Evdokia , Daniel L. Rolnik , Wei Zhou , Guadalupe Estrada‐Gutierrez , Kaori Koga , Rossana P. V. Francisco , Clare Whitehead , et al. 2023. “Pre‐Eclampsia.” Nature Reviews Disease Primers 9 : 8. 10.1038/s41572-023-00417-6
32 Geenes, Victoria , and Catherine Williamson . 2009. “Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy.” World Journal of Gastroenterology 15 : 2049–2066. 10.3748/wjg.15.2049 19418576
33 Nuriel‐Ohayon, Meital , Hadar Neuman , Oren Ziv , Anna Belogolovski , Yiftah Barsheshet , Naamah Bloch , Atara Uzan , et al. 2019. “Progesterone Increases Bifidobacterium Relative Abundance during Late Pregnancy.” Cell Reports 27 : 730–736.e3. 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.03.075 30995472
34 Makino, Hiroshi , Akira Kushiro , Eiji Ishikawa , Delphine Muylaert , Hiroyuki Kubota , Takafumi Sakai , Kenji Oishi , et al. 2011. “Transmission of Intestinal Bifidobacterium longum subsp. longum Strains from Mother to Infant, Determined by Multilocus Sequencing Typing and Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism.” Applied and Environmental Microbiology Journal 77 : 6788–6793. 10.1128/AEM.05346-11
35 Bäckhed, Fredrik , Josefine Roswall , Yangqing Peng , Qiang Feng , Huijue Jia , Petia Kovatcheva‐Datchary , Yin Li , et al. 2015. “Dynamics and Stabilization of the Human Gut Microbiome During the First Year of Life.” Cell Host & Microbe 17 : 690–703. 10.1016/j.chom.2015.04.004 25974306
36 DiGiulio, Daniel B. , Benjamin J. Callahan , Paul J. McMurdie , Elizabeth K. Costello , Deirdre J. Lyell , Anna Robaczewska , Christine L. Sun , et al. 2015. “Temporal and Spatial Variation of the Human Microbiota During Pregnancy.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 112 : 11060–11065. 10.1073/pnas.1502875112 26283357
37 Jost, Ted , Christophe Lacroix , Christian Braegger , and Christophe Chassard . 2014. “Stability of the Maternal Gut Microbiota during Late Pregnancy and Early Lactation.” Current Microbiology 68 : 419–427. 10.1007/s00284-013-0491-6 24258611
38 Arumugam, Manimozhiyan , Jeroen Raes , Eric Pelletier , Denis Le Paslier , Takuji Yamada , Daniel R. Mende , Gabriel R. Fernandes , et al. 2011. “Enterotypes of the Human Gut Microbiome.” Nature 473 : 174–180. 10.1038/nature09944 21508958
39 Adlercreutz, H. , M. O. Pulkkinen , E. K. Hämäläinen , and J. T. Korpela . 1984. “Studies on the Role of Intestinal Bacteria in Metabolism of Synthetic and Natural Steroid Hormones.” Journal of Steroid Biochemistry 20 : 217–229. 10.1016/0022-4731(84)90208-5 6231418
40 Plottel, Claudia S. , and Martin J. Blaser . 2011. “Microbiome and Malignancy.” Cell Host & Microbe 10 : 324–335. 10.1016/j.chom.2011.10.003 22018233
41 Baker, James M. , Layla Al‐Nakkash , and Melissa M. Herbst‐Kralovetz . 2017. “Estrogen–Gut Microbiome Axis: Physiological and Clinical Implications.” Maturitas 103 : 45–53. 10.1016/j.maturitas.2017.06.025 28778332
42 Li, Di , Ting Sun , Yongqing Tong , Juan Le , Qian Yao , Jun Tao , Hang Liu , et al. 2023. “Gut‐Microbiome‐Expressed 3β‐Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Degrades Estradiol and is Linked to Depression in Premenopausal Females.” Cell Metabolism 35 : 685–694.e5. 10.1016/j.cmet.2023.02.017 36933555
43 Menon, Rani , Sara E. Watson , Laura N. Thomas , Clinton D. Allred , Alan Dabney , M. Andrea Azcarate‐Peril , and Joseph M. Sturino . 2013. “Diet Complexity and Estrogen Receptor β Status Affect the Composition of the Murine Intestinal Microbiota.” Applied and Environmental Microbiology 79 : 5763–5773. 10.1128/AEM.01182-13 23872567
44 Wrzosek, Laura , Sylvie Miquel , Marie‐Louise Noordine , Stephan Bouet , Marie Joncquel Chevalier‐Curt , Véronique Robert , Catherine Philippe , et al. 2013. “ Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii Influence the Production of Mucus Glycans and the Development of Goblet Cells in the Colonic Epithelium of a Gnotobiotic Model Rodent.” BMC Biology 11 : 61. 10.1186/1741-7007-11-61 23692866
45 van der Giessen, Janine , C. van der Woude , Maikel Peppelenbosch , and Gwenny Fuhler . 2019. “A Direct Effect  of Sex Hormones on Epithelial Barrier Function in Inflammatory Bowel Disease Models.” Cells 8 : 261. 10.3390/cells8030261 30893871
46 Ma, Yuanyuan , Tianyao Liu , Xin Li , Anqi Kong , Rui Xiao , Ruxin Xie , Junwei Gao , et al. 2022. “Estrogen Receptor β Deficiency Impairs Gut Microbiota: A Possible Mechanism of IBD‐induced Anxiety‐Like Behavior.” Microbiome 10 : 160. 10.1186/s40168-022-01356-2 36175956
47 Opiyo, Stephen O. , Rosevelt L. Pardy , Hideaki Moriyama , and Etsuko N. Moriyama . 2010. “Evolution  of the Kdo2–Lipid A Biosynthesis in Bacteria.” BMC Evolutionary Biology 10 : 362. 10.1186/1471-2148-10-362 21106097
48 Kamimura, Itsuka , Akiyuki Watarai , Takuma Takamura , Atsushi Takeo , Kyoko Miura , Hidetoshi Morita , Kazutaka Mogi , and Takefumi Kikusui . 2019. “Gonadal Steroid Hormone Secretion during the Juvenile Period Depends on Host‐Specific Microbiota and Contributes to the Development of Odor Preference.” Developmental Psychobiology 61 : 670–678. 10.1002/dev.21827 30680708
49 Robinson, Dionne P. , and Sabra L. Klein . 2012. “Pregnancy and Pregnancy‐Associated Hormones Alter Immune Responses and Disease Pathogenesis.” Hormones and Behavior 62 : 263–271. 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.02.023 22406114
50 Kondo, Shizuki , Jin‐Zhong Xiao , Takumi Satoh , Toshitaka Odamaki , Sachiko Takahashi , Hirosuke Sugahara , Tomoko Yaeshima , Keiji Iwatsuki , Asuka Kamei , and Keiko Abe . 2010. “Antiobesity Effects of Bifidobacterium breve strain B‐3 Supplementation in a Mouse Model With High‐Fat Diet‐Induced Obesity.” Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry 74 : 1656–1661. 10.1271/bbb.100267 20699581
51 Kikuchi, Keita , Mahmoud Ben Othman , and Kazuichi Sakamoto . 2018. “Sterilized Bifidobacteria Suppressed Fat Accumulation and Blood Glucose Level.” Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 501 : 1041–1047. 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.05.105 29777696
52 Le, Thi Kim Chung , Toshio Hosaka , Thi Thanh Tam Le , Thi Giang Nguyen , Quang Binh Tran , Thi Hong Hao Le , and Xuan Da Pham . 2014. “Oral Administration of Bifidobacterium spp. Improves Insulin Resistance, Induces Adiponectin, and Prevents Inflammatory Adipokine Expressions.” Biomedical Research 35 : 303–310. 10.2220/biomedres.35.303 25355437
53 Dahl, Cecilie , Maggie Stanislawski , Nina Iszatt , Siddhartha Mandal , Catherine Lozupone , Jose C. Clemente , Rob Knight , Hein Stigum , and Merete Eggesbø . 2017. “Gut Microbiome of Mothers Delivering Prematurely Shows Reduced Diversity and Lower Relative Abundance of Bifidobacterium and Streptococcus .” PLos One 12 : e0184336. 10.1371/journal.pone.0184336 29069100
54 Meis, Paul J. , Mark Klebanoff , Elizabeth Thom , Mitchell P. Dombrowski , Baha Sibai , Atef H. Moawad , Catherine Y. Spong , et al. 2003. “Prevention  of Recurrent Preterm Delivery by 17 Alpha‐Hydroxyprogesterone Caproate.” New England Journal of Medicine 348 : 2379–2385. 10.1056/NEJMoa035140 12802023
55 Nuriel‐Ohayon, Meital , Anna Belogolovski , Sharon Komissarov , Meirav Ben Izhak , Oshrit Shtossel , Hadar Neuman , Oren Ziv , et al. 2021. “Progesterone Supplementation in Mice Leads to Microbiome Alterations and Weight Gain in a Sex‐Specific Manner.” bioRxiv 10.1101/2021.10.06.463337
56 Pace, Fernanda , and Paula I. Watnick . 2021. “The Interplay  of Sex Steroids, the Immune Response, and the Intestinal Microbiota.” Trends in Microbiology 29 : 849–859. 10.1016/j.tim.2020.11.001 33257138
57 Colldén, Hannah , Andreas Landin , Ville Wallenius , Erik Elebring , Lars Fändriks , Maria E. Nilsson , Henrik Ryberg , et al. 2019. “The Gut Microbiota is a Major Regulator of Androgen Metabolism in Intestinal Contents.” American Journal of Physiology‐Endocrinology and Metabolism 317 : E1182–E1192. 10.1152/ajpendo.00338.2019 31689143
58 Markle, Janet G. M. , Daniel N. Frank , Steven Mortin‐Toth , Charles E. Robertson , Leah M. Feazel , Ulrike Rolle‐Kampczyk , Martin von Bergen , Kathy D. McCoy , Andrew J. Macpherson , and Jayne S. Danska . 2013. “Sex Differences in the Gut Microbiome Drive Hormone‐Dependent Regulation of Autoimmunity.” Science 339 : 1084–1088. 10.1126/science.1233521 23328391
59 de la Torre, Rafael , Xavier de la Torre , Concepción Alía , Jordi Segura , Teresa Baró , and Josep M. Torres‐Rodríguez . 2001. “Changes  in Androgenic Steroid Profile due to Urine Contamination by Microorganisms: A Prospective Study in the Context of Doping Control.” Analytical Biochemistry 289 : 116–123. 10.1006/abio.2000.4918 11161304
60 Bilton, R. F . 1995. “Microbial Production of Testosterone.” The Lancet 345 : 1186–1187. 10.1016/s0140-6736(95)91022-0
61 Qi, Xinyu , Chuyu Yun , Lulu Sun , Jialin Xia , Qing Wu , Ying Wang , Lina Wang , et al. 2019. “Gut Microbiota–Bile Acid–Interleukin‐22 Axis Orchestrates Polycystic Ovary Syndrome.” Nature Medicine 25 : 1225–1233. 10.1038/s41591-019-0509-0
62 Org, Elin , Margarete Mehrabian , Brian W. Parks , Petia Shipkova , Xiaoqin Liu , Thomas A. Drake , and Aldons J. Lusis . 2016. “Sex Differences and Hormonal Effects on Gut Microbiota Composition in Mice.” Gut Microbes 7 : 313–322. 10.1080/19490976.2016.1203502 27355107
63 Wu, Min , Cheng Chi , Yuxi Yang , Shan Guo , Tianhe Li , Muqing Gu , Zhang Tingting , Huimin Gao , Ruixia Liu , and Chenghong Yin . 2022. “Dynamics  of Gut Microbiota During Pregnancy in Women With TPOAb‐Positive Subclinical Hypothyroidism: A Prospective Cohort Study.” BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 22 : 592. 10.1186/s12884-022-04923-5 35883066
64 Xie, Liangzhuo , Huaye Zhao , and Wei Chen . 2023. “Relationship Between Gut Microbiota and Thyroid Function: A Two‐Sample Mendelian Randomization Study.” Frontiers in Endocrinology 14 : 1240752. 10.3389/fendo.2023.1240752 37822602
65 Su, Xinhuan , Xianlun Yin , Yue Liu , Xuefang Yan , Shucui Zhang , Xiaowei Wang , Zongwei Lin , et al. 2020. “Gut Dysbiosis Contributes to the Imbalance  of Treg and Th17 Cells in Graves' Disease Patients by Propionic Acid.” The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 105 : 3526–3547. 10.1210/clinem/dgaa511
66 Virili, Camilla , and Marco Centanni . 2017. “‘With a Little Help From My Friends’—The Role of Microbiota in Thyroid Hormone Metabolism and Enterohepatic Recycling.” Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 458 : 39–43. 10.1016/j.mce.2017.01.053 28167127
67 Yao, Zhenyu , Meng Zhao , Ying Gong , Wenbin Chen , Qian Wang , Yilin Fu , Tian Guo , Jiajun Zhao , Ling Gao , and Tao Bo . 2020. “Relation  of Gut Microbes and L‐Thyroxine through Altered Thyroxine Metabolism in Subclinical Hypothyroidism Subjects.” Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 10 : 495. 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00495 33072620
68 Hazenberg, M. P. , W. W. Herder , and T. J. Visser . 1988. “Hydrolysis  of Iodothyronine Conjugates by Intestinal Bacteria.” FEMS Microbiology Reviews 54 : 9–16. 10.1111/j.1574-6968.1988.tb02709.x-i1
69 Hays, Marguerite T . 1988. “Thyroid Hormone and the Gut.” Endocrine Research 14 : 203–224. 10.3109/07435808809032986 3049061
70 Deherder, W. , M. Hazenberg , A. Pennockschroder , G. Hennemann and T. Visser . 1986. “Hydrolysis  of Iodothyronine Glucuronides by Obligately Anaerobic Bacteria Isolated From Human Faecal Flora.” FEMS Microbiology Letters 35 : 249–253. 10.1016/0378-1097(86)90101-1
71 Natividad, Jane M. M. , and Elena F. Verdu . 2013. “Modulation  of Intestinal Barrier by Intestinal Microbiota: Pathological and Therapeutic Implications.” Pharmacological Research 69 : 42–51. 10.1016/j.phrs.2012.10.007 23089410
72 Makki, Kassem , Edward C. Deehan , Jens Walter , and Fredrik Bäckhed . 2018. “The Impact  of Dietary Fiber on Gut Microbiota in Host Health and Disease.” Cell Host & Microbe 23 : 705–715. 10.1016/j.chom.2018.05.012 29902436
73 Savard, Claudia , Anne‐Sophie Plante , Elise Carbonneau , Claudia Gagnon , Julie Robitaille , Benoît Lamarche , Simone Lemieux , and Anne‐Sophie Morisset . 2020. “Do Pregnant Women Eat Healthier Than Non‐Pregnant Women of Childbearing Age?” International Journal of Food Sciences and Nutrition 71 : 757–768. 10.1080/09637486.2020.1723499 32024396
74 Barrett, Helen , Luisa Gomez‐Arango , Shelley Wilkinson , H. McIntyre , Leonie Callaway , Mark Morrison , and Marloes Dekker Nitert . 2018. “A Vegetarian Diet is a Major Determinant  of Gut Microbiota Composition in Early Pregnancy.” Nutrients 10 : 890. 10.3390/nu10070890 30002323
75 Gomez‐Arango, Luisa F. , Helen L. Barrett , Shelley A. Wilkinson , Leonie K. Callaway , H. David McIntyre , Mark Morrison , and Marloes Dekker Nitert . 2018. “Low Dietary Fiber Intake Increases Collinsella Abundance in the Gut Microbiota of Overweight and Obese Pregnant Women.” Gut Microbes 9 : 189–201. 10.1080/19490976.2017.1406584 29144833
76 Miko, Eva , Andras Csaszar , Jozsef Bodis , and Kalman Kovacs . 2022. “The Maternal–Fetal Gut Microbiota Axis: Physiological Changes, Dietary Influence, and Modulation Possibilities.” Life 12 : 424. 10.3390/life12030424 35330175
77 Selma‐Royo, M. , I. García‐Mantrana , M. Calatayud , A. Parra‐Llorca , C. Martínez‐Costa , and M. C. Collado . 2021. “Maternal Diet During Pregnancy and Intestinal Markers are Associated With Early Gut Microbiota.” The European Journal of Nutrition 60 : 1429–1442. 10.1007/s00394-020-02337-7 32728880
78 Verbeke, Wim , and Ilse De Bourdeaudhuij . 2007. “Dietary Behaviour of Pregnant Versus Non‐Pregnant Women.” Appetite 48 : 78–86. 10.1016/j.appet.2006.07.078 17005297
79 Mandal, Siddhartha , Keith M. Godfrey , Daniel McDonald , Will V. Treuren , Jørgen V. Bjørnholt , Tore Midtvedt , Birgitte Moen , et al. 2016. “Fat and Vitamin Intakes During Pregnancy Have Stronger Relations With a Pro‐Inflammatory Maternal Microbiota Than Does Carbohydrate Intake.” Microbiome 4 : 55. 10.1186/s40168-016-0200-3 27756413
80 Chimerel, Catalin , Edward Emery , David K. Summers , Ulrich Keyser , Fiona M. Gribble , and Frank Reimann . 2014. “Bacterial Metabolite Indole Modulates Incretin Secretion from Intestinal Enteroendocrine L Cells.” Cell Reports 9 : 1202–1208. 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.10.032 25456122
81 Ma, Linqiang , Honggui Li , Jinbo Hu , Juan Zheng , Jing Zhou , Rachel Botchlett , Destiny Matthews , et al. 2020. “Indole Alleviates Diet‐Induced Hepatic Steatosis and Inflammation in a Manner Involving Myeloid Cell 6‐Phosphofructo‐2‐Kinase/Fructose‐2,6‐Biphosphatase 3.” Hepatology 72 : 1191–1203. 10.1002/hep.31115 31953865
82 Konopelski, Piotr , and Izabella Mogilnicka . 2022. “Biological Effects  of Indole‐3‐Propionic Acid, a Gut Microbiota‐Derived Metabolite, and its Precursor Tryptophan in Mammals' Health and Disease.” International Journal of Molecular Sciences 23 : 1222. 10.3390/ijms23031222 35163143
83 Astbury, Stuart , Aleida Song , Mi Zhou , Brent Nielsen , Abha Hoedl , Benjamin P. Willing , Michael E. Symonds , and Rhonda C. Bell . 2018. “High Fructose Intake During Pregnancy in Rats Influences the Maternal Microbiome and Gut Development in the offspring.” Frontiers in Genetics 9 : 203. 10.3389/fgene.2018.00203 29971089
84 Chen, Jun , Kerry Wright , John M. Davis , Patricio Jeraldo , Eric V. Marietta , Joseph Murray , Heidi Nelson , Eric L. Matteson , and Veena Taneja . 2016. “An Expansion of Rare Lineage Intestinal Microbes Characterizes Rheumatoid Arthritis.” Genome Medicine 8 : 43. 10.1186/s13073-016-0299-7 27102666
85 Gohir, Wajiha , Katherine M. Kennedy , Jessica G. Wallace , Michelle Saoi , Christian J. Bellissimo , Philip Britz‐McKibbin , Jim J. Petrik , Michael G. Surette , and Deborah M. Sloboda . 2019. “High‐Fat Diet Intake Modulates Maternal Intestinal Adaptations to Pregnancy and Results in Placental Hypoxia, As Well As Altered Fetal Gut Barrier Proteins and Immune Markers.” The Journal of Physiology 597 : 3029–3051. 10.1113/JP277353 31081119
86 Wang, Lv , Claus T. Christophersen , Michael J. Sorich , Jacobus P. Gerber , Manya T. Angley , and Michael A. Conlon . 2013. “Increased Abundance of Sutterella spp. and Ruminococcus torques in Feces of Children With Autism Spectrum Disorder.” Molecular Autism 4 : 42. 10.1186/2040-2392-4-42 24188502
87 Mjaaseth, Ulrik N. , Jackson C. Norris , Niklas D. J. Aardema , Madison L. Bunnell , Robert E. Ward , Korry J. Hintze , and Clara E. Cho . 2021. “Excess Vitamins or Imbalance  of Folic Acid and Choline in the Gestational Diet Alter the Gut Microbiota and Obesogenic Effects in Wistar Rat offspring.” Nutrients 13 : 4510. 10.3390/nu13124510 34960062
88 Stråvik, Mia , Malin Barman , Bill Hesselmar , Anna Sandin , Agnes E. Wold , and Ann‐Sofie Sandberg . 2020. “Maternal Intake  of Cow's Milk During Lactation is Associated With Lower Prevalence  of Food Allergy in Offspring.” Nutrients 12 : 3680. 10.3390/nu12123680 33260602
89 Sonnenburg, Erica D. , and Justin L. Sonnenburg . 2019. “The Ancestral and Industrialized Gut Microbiota and Implications for Human Health.” Nature Reviews Microbiology 17 : 383–390. 10.1038/s41579-019-0191-8
90 Wallace, Jessica G. , Christian J. Bellissimo , Erica Yeo , Yu Fei Xia , Jim J. Petrik , Michael G. Surette , Dawn M. E. Bowdish , and Deborah M. Sloboda . 2019. “Obesity During Pregnancy Results in Maternal Intestinal Inflammation, Placental Hypoxia, and Alters Fetal Glucose Metabolism at Mid‐Gestation.” Scientific Report 9 : 17621. 10.1038/s41598-019-54098-x
91 Rosenbaum, Michael , Rob Knight , and Rudolph L. Leibel . 2015. “The Gut Microbiota in Human Energy Homeostasis and Obesity.” Trends in Endocriology & Metabolism 26 : 493–501. 10.1016/j.tem.2015.07.002
92 Crusell, Mie Korslund Wiinblad , Tue Haldor Hansen , Trine Nielsen , Kristine Højgaard Allin , Malte C. Rühlemann , Peter Damm , Henrik Vestergaard , et al. 2018. “Gestational Diabetes is Associated with Change in the Gut Microbiota Composition in Third Trimester of Pregnancy and Postpartum.” Microbiome 6 : 89. 10.1186/s40168-018-0472-x 29764499
93 Guzzardi, Maria Angela , Thomas H. A. Ederveen , Francesca Rizzo , Alessandro Weisz , Maria Carmen Collado , Filippo Muratori , Gabriele Gross , Wynand Alkema , and Patricia Iozzo . 2022. “Maternal Pre‐Pregnancy Overweight and Neonatal Gut Bacterial Colonization are Associated With Cognitive Development and Gut Microbiota Composition in Pre‐School‐Age Offspring.” Brain, Behavior, and Immunity 100 : 311–320. 10.1016/j.bbi.2021.12.009 34920092
94 Stanislawski, Maggie A. , Dana Dabelea , Brandie D. Wagner , Marci K. Sontag , Catherine A. Lozupone , and Merete Eggesbø . 2017. “Pre‐Pregnancy Weight, Gestational Weight Gain, and the Gut Microbiota of Mothers and their Infants.” Microbiome 5 : 113. 10.1186/s40168-017-0332-0 28870230
95 Galley, Jeffrey D. , Michael Bailey , Claire Kamp Dush , Sarah Schoppe‐Sullivan , and Lisa M. Christian . 2014. “Maternal Obesity is Associated With Alterations in the Gut Microbiome in Toddlers.” PLos One 9 : e113026. 10.1371/journal.pone.0113026 25409177
96 Pereira, Priscilla Perez da Silva , Fabiana A. F. Da Mata , Ana Claudia Godoy Figueiredo , Keitty Regina Cordeiro de Andrade , and Maurício Gomes Pereira . 2017. “Maternal Active Smoking During Pregnancy and Low Birth Weight in the Americas: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis.” Nicotine & Tobacco Research 19 : 497–505. 10.1093/ntr/ntw228 28403455
97 Zubcevic, Jasenka , Jacqueline Watkins , Cindy Lin , Byrell Bautista , Heather M. Hatch , Sergei G. Tevosian , and Linda F. Hayward . 2022. “Nicotine Exposure during Rodent Pregnancy Alters the Composition  of Maternal Gut Microbiota and Abundance  of Maternal and Amniotic Short Chain Fatty Acids.” Metabolites 12 : 735. 10.3390/metabo12080735 36005607
98 Hayward, Linda , Jacqueline Watkins , Byrell Bautista , Cindy Lin , Wendi Malphurs and Jasenka Zubcevic . 2020. “Nicotine Exposure During Pregnancy Alters the Maternal Gut Microbiome and Both Cecal and Plasma Short Chain Fatty Acids in Sprague–Dawley Rats.” The FASEB Journal 34 : 1. 10.1096/fasebj.2020.34.s1.03967
99 Vangay, Pajau , Tonya Ward , Jeffrey S. Gerber , and Dan Knights . 2015. “Antibiotics, Pediatric Dysbiosis, and Disease.” Cell Host & Microbe 17 : 553–564. 10.1016/j.chom.2015.04.006 25974298
100 Francino, M. P . 2016. “Antibiotics and the Human Gut Microbiome: Dysbioses and Accumulation  of Resistances.” Frontiers in Microbiology 6 : 1543. 10.3389/fmicb.2015.01543 26793178
101 Li, Weizhong , Terhi Tapiainen , Lauren Brinkac , Hernan A. Lorenzi , Kelvin Moncera , Moncera , Mysore V. Tejesvi , Jarmo Salo , and Karen E. Nelson . 2021. “Vertical Transmission  of Gut Microbiome and Antimicrobial Resistance Genes in Infants Exposed to Antibiotics at Birth.” The Journal of Infectious Diseases 224 : 1236–1246. 10.1093/infdis/jiaa155 32239170
102 Chai, Grace , Laura Governale , Ann W. McMahon , James Phillip Trinidad , Judy Staffa , and Dianne Murphy . 2012. “Trends  of Outpatient Prescription Drug Utilization in US Children, 2002–2010.” Pediatrics 130 : 23–31. 10.1542/peds.2011-2879 22711728
103 Arboleya, Silvia , Silvia Saturio , and Miguel Gueimonde . 2022. “Impact  of Intrapartum Antibiotics on the Developing Microbiota: A Review.” Microbiome Research Reports 1 : 22. 10.20517/mrr.2022.04 38046905
104 Samarra, Anna , Maria Esteban‐Torres , Raul Cabrera‐Rubio , Manuel Bernabeu , Silvia Arboleya , Miguel Gueimonde , and Maria Carmen Collado . 2023. “Maternal–Infant Antibiotic Resistance Genes Transference: What Do We Know?” Gut Microbes 15 : 2194797. 10.1080/19490976.2023.2194797 37020319
105 Ajslev, T. A. , C. S. Andersen , M. Gamborg , T. I. A. Sørensen , and T. Jess . 2011. “Childhood Overweight after Establishment of the Gut Microbiota: The Role of Delivery Mode, Pre‐Pregnancy Weight and Early Administration of Antibiotics.” International Journal of Obesity 35 : 522–529. 10.1038/ijo.2011.27 21386800
106 Vethaak, A. Dick , and Juliette Legler . 2021. “Microplastics and Human Health.” Science 371 : 672–674. 10.1126/science.abe5041 33574197
107 Ragusa, Antonio , Alessandro Svelato , Criselda Santacroce , Piera Catalano , Valentina Notarstefano , Oliana Carnevali , Fabrizio Papa , et al. 2021. “Plasticenta: First Evidence of Microplastics in Human Placenta.” Environment International 146 : 106274. 10.1016/j.envint.2020.106274 33395930
108 Braun, Thorsten , Loreen Ehrlich , Wolfgang Henrich , Sebastian Koeppel , Ievgeniia Lomako , Philipp Schwabl , and Bettina Liebmann . 2021. “Detection  of Microplastic in Human Placenta and Meconium in a Clinical Setting.” Pharmaceutics 13 : 921. 10.3390/pharmaceutics13070921 34206212
109 Sripada, Kam , Aneta Wierzbicka , Khaled Abass , Joan O. Grimalt , Andreas Erbe , Halina B. Röllin , Pál Weihe , et al. 2022. “A Children's Health Perspective on Nano‐ and Microplastics.” Environ Health Perspect 130 : 15001. 10.1289/EHP9086 35080434
110 Liu, Shaojie , Xinyuan Liu , Jialin Guo , Ruoru Yang , Hangwei Wang , Yongyun Sun , Bo Chen , and Ruihua Dong . 2022. “The Association between Microplastics and Microbiota in Placentas and Meconium: The First Evidence in Humans.” Environmental Science & Technology 57 : 17774–17785. 10.1021/acs.est.2c04706 36269573
111 Luo, Ting , Caiyun Wang , Zihong Pan , Cuiyuan Jin , Zhengwei Fu , and Yuanxiang Jin . 2019. “Maternal Polystyrene Microplastic Exposure during Gestation and Lactation Altered Metabolic Homeostasis in the Dams and their F1 and F2 Offspring.” Environ Sci Technol 53 : 10978–10992. 10.1021/acs.est.9b03191 31448906
112 Wen, Siyue , Yu Zhao , Shanji Liu , Yanbiao Chen , Hongbin Yuan , and Hengyi Xu . 2022. “Polystyrene Microplastics Exacerbated Liver Injury From Cyclophosphamide in Mice: Insight Into Gut Microbiota.” Science of the Total Environment 840 : 156668. 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.156668 35710014
113 Turpin, Cornelius A. , Samuel A. Sakyi , William K. B. A. Owiredu , Richard K. D. Ephraim , and Enoch O. Anto . 2015. “Association between Adverse Pregnancy Outcome and Imbalance in Angiogenic Regulators and Oxidative Stress Biomarkers in Gestational Hypertension and Preeclampsia.” BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 15 : 189. 10.1186/s12884-015-0624-y 26303772
114 Agbozo, Faith , Abdulai Abubakari , Joyce Der , and Albrecht Jahn . 2016. “Prevalence  of Low Birth Weight, Macrosomia and Stillbirth and Their Relationship to Associated Maternal Risk Factors in Hohoe Municipality, Ghana.” Midwifery 40 : 200–206. 10.1016/j.midw.2016.06.016 27474932
115 Leveno, Kenneth , F. Cunningham , James Alexander , Steven Bloom , Brian Casey , Jodi Dashe , Jeanne Sheffield , and Scott Roberts . 2007. Williams Manual of Obstetrics: Pregnancy Complications. 22nd ed. McGraw‐Hill. https://books.google.com.hk/books?id=JChbgXEaucgC
116 Tadese, Mesfin , Kefyalew Dagne , Abate Dargie Wubetu , Shiferaw Abeway , Alemayehu Bekele , Worku Misganaw Kebede , and Getaneh Baye Mulu . 2022. “Assessment  of the Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes and its Associated Factors among Deliveries at Debre Berhan Comprehensive Specialized Hospital, Northeast Ethiopia.” PLos One 17 : e0271287. 10.1371/journal.pone.0271287 35802663
117 Wang, Xing , Hongli Liu , Yifan Li , Shuai Huang , Lan Zhang , Chiying Cao , Philip N. Baker , Chao Tong , Peng Zheng , and Hongbo Qi . 2020. “Altered Gut Bacterial and Metabolic Signatures and Their Interaction in Gestational Diabetes Mellitus.” Gut Microbes 12 : 1840765. 10.1080/19490976.2020.1840765 33222612
118 Fan, Yong , and Oluf Pedersen . 2021. “Gut Microbiota in Human Metabolic Health and Disease.” Nature Reviews Microbiology 19 : 55–71. 10.1038/s41579-020-0433-9 32887946
119 Karlsson, Fredrik H. , Valentina Tremaroli , Intawat Nookaew , Göran Bergström , Carl Johan Behre , Björn Fagerberg , Jens Nielsen , and Fredrik Bäckhed . 2013. “Gut Metagenome in European Women With Normal, Impaired and Diabetic Glucose Control.” Nature 498 : 99–103. 10.1038/nature12198 23719380
120 Kuang, Ya‐Shu , Jin‐Hua Lu , Sheng‐Hui Li , Jun‐Hua Li , Ming‐Yang Yuan , Jian‐Rong He , Nian‐Nian Chen , et al. 2017. “Connections between the Human Gut Microbiome and Gestational Diabetes Mellitus.” Gigascience 6 : 1–12. 10.1093/gigascience/gix058
121 Sun, Zhonghan , Xiong‐Fei Pan , Xiao Li , Limiao Jiang , Ping Hu , Yi Wang , Yi Ye , et al. 2023. “The Gut Microbiome Dynamically Associates with Host Glucose Metabolism throughout Pregnancy: Longitudinal Findings From a Matched Case–Control Study  of Gestational Diabetes Mellitus.” Advanced Science 10 : e2205289. 10.1002/advs.202205289 36683149
122 Hasain, Zubaidah , Norfilza Mohd Mokhtar , Nor Azmi Kamaruddin , Nor Azlin Mohamed Ismail , Nurul Huda Razalli , Justin Vijay Gnanou , and Raja Affendi Raja Ali . 2020. “Gut Microbiota and Gestational Diabetes Mellitus: A Review  of Host–Gut Microbiota Interactions and Their Therapeutic Potential.” Frontiers in Cellular Infection Microbiology 10 : 188. 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00188 32500037
123 Xifra, Gemma , Eduardo Esteve , Wifredo Ricart and José Manuel Fernández‐Real . 2016. “Influence of Dietary Factors on Gut Microbiota: The Role on Insulin Resistance and Diabetes Mellitus.” Molecular Nutrition and Diabetes 12 : 147–154.
124 Parker, Bianca J. , Pamela A. Wearsch , Alida C. M. Veloo , and Alex Rodriguez‐Palacios . 2020. “The Genus Alistipes: Gut Bacteria With Emerging Implications to Inflammation, Cancer, and Mental Health.” Frontiers in Immunology 11 : 906. 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00906 32582143
125 Van Syoc, Emily P. , Janhavi Damani , Zachary DiMattia , Erika Ganda , and Connie J Rogers . 2023. “The Effects  of Bifidobacterium Probiotic Supplementation on Blood Glucose: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis  of Animal Models and Clinical Evidence.” Advances in Nutrition 100137. 10.1016/j.advnut.2023.10.009 37923223
126 Larraufie, P. , C. Martin‐Gallausiaux , N. Lapaque , J. Dore , F. M. Gribble , F. Reimann , and H. M. Blottiere . 2018. “SCFAs Strongly Stimulate PYY Production in Human Enteroendocrine Cells.” Scientific Report 8 : 74. 10.1038/s41598-017-18259-0
127 Canfora, Emanuel E. , Ruth C. R. Meex , Koen Venema , and Ellen E. Blaak . 2019. “Gut Microbial Metabolites in Obesity, NAFLD and T2DM.” Nature Reviews Endocrinology 15 : 261–273. 10.1038/s41574-019-0156-z
128 Natividad, Jane M. , Allison Agus , Julien Planchais , Bruno Lamas , Anne Charlotte Jarry , Rebeca Martin , Marie‐Laure Michel , et al. 2018. “Impaired Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Ligand Production by the Gut Microbiota is a Key Factor in Metabolic Syndrome.” Cell Metabolism 28 : 737–749.e4. 10.1016/j.cmet.2018.07.001 30057068
129 Hosseinkhani, F. , A. Heinken , I. Thiele , P. W. Lindenburg , A. C. Harms , and T. Hankemeier . 2021. “The Contribution of Gut Bacterial Metabolites in the Human Immune Signaling Pathway of Non‐Communicable Diseases.” Gut Microbes 13 : 1–22. 10.1080/19490976.2021.1882927
130 Agus, Allison , Karine Clément , and Harry Sokol . 2021. “Gut Microbiota‐Derived Metabolites as Central Regulators in Metabolic Disorders.” Gut 70 : 1174–1182. 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-323071 33272977
131 Zhu, Yeyi , Dinesh K. Barupal , Amanda L. Ngo , Charles P. Quesenberry , Juanran Feng , Oliver Fiehn , and Assiamira Ferrara . 2022. “Predictive Metabolomic Markers in Early to Mid‐Pregnancy for Gestational Diabetes Mellitus: A Prospective Test and Validation Study.” Diabetes 71 : 1807–1817. 10.2337/db21-1093 35532743
132 Trajkova, Marija , Katja Molan , Maja Zugan , Jerneja Ambrožič Avguštin , Marjanca Starčič Erjavec , Darja Žgur Bertok , and Draženka Pongrac Barlovič . 2021. “Increased Fecal Indole Concentration in Women With Gestational Diabetes: A Pilot Study.” Acta Diabetologica 58 : 241–243. 10.1007/s00592-020-01632-3 33216208
133 Qin, Shengtang , Yutong Wang , Shuxian Wang , Bohan Ning , Jing Huai , and Huixia Yang . 2022. “Gut Microbiota in Women with Gestational Diabetes Mellitus Has Potential Impact on Metabolism in Pregnant Mice and Their Offspring.” Frontiers in Microbiology 13 : 870422. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.870422 35992705
134 Mol, Ben W. J. , Claire T. Roberts , Shakila Thangaratinam , Laura A. Magee , Christianne J. M. de Groot , and G. Justus Hofmeyr . 2016. “Pre‐Eclampsia.” The Lancet 387 : 999–1011. 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00070-7
135 Li, Pengsheng , Haiyan Wang , Lan Guo , Xiaoyan Gou , Gengdong Chen , Dongxin Lin , Dazhi Fan , Xiaoling Guo , and Zhengping Liu . 2022. “Association Between Gut Microbiota and Preeclampsia‐Eclampsia: A Two‐Sample Mendelian Randomization Study.” BMC Medicine 20 : 443. 10.1186/s12916-022-02657-x 36380372
136 Chen, Xia , Pan Li , Mian Liu , Huimin Zheng , Yan He , Mu‐Xuan Chen , Wenli Tang , et al. 2020. “Gut Dysbiosis Induces the Development of Pre‐Eclampsia Through Bacterial Translocation.” Gut 69 : 513–522. 10.1136/gutjnl-2019-319101 31900289
137 Jin, Jiajia , Liaomei Gao , Xiuli Zou , Yun Zhang , Zhijian Zheng , Xinjie Zhang , Jiaxuan Li , et al. 2022. “Gut Dysbiosis Promotes Preeclampsia by Regulating Macrophages and Trophoblasts.” Circulation Research 131 : 492–506. 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.122.320771 35950704
138 Huang, Sui‐Shane , Rongle Liu , Shufu Chang , Xiao Li , Xinyu Weng , and Junbo Ge . 2023. “Gut Microbiota‐Derived Tryptophan Metabolite Indole‐3‐aldehyde Ameliorates Aortic Dissection.” Nutrients 15 : 4150. 10.3390/nu15194150 37836434
139 Tang, Bo , Li Tang , Shengpeng Li , Shuang Liu , Jialin He , Sumin Wang , Pan Li , et al. 2023. “Gut Microbiota Alters Host Bile Acid Metabolism to Contribute to Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy.” Nature Communications 14 : 1305. 10.1038/s41467-023-36981-4
140 Zhan, Qitao , Xuchen Qi , Ruopeng Weng , Fangfang Xi , Yuan Chen , Yayun Wang , Wen Hu , Baihui Zhao , and Qiong Luo . 2021. “Alterations  of the Human Gut Microbiota in Intrahepatic Cholestasis  of Pregnancy.” Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 11 : 635680. 10.3389/fcimb.2021.635680 33996622
141 Li, Rong , Xuehai Chen , Zhongzhen Liu , Yan Chen , Chuan Liu , Lingfei Ye , Liang Xiao , et al. 2020. “Characterization  of Gut Microbiota Associated with Clinical Parameters in Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy.” BMC Gastroenterology 20 : 395. 10.1186/s12876-020-01510-w 33225888
142 Li, Guo‐Hua , Shi‐Jia Huang , Xiang Li , Xiao‐Song Liu , and Qiao‐Ling Du . 2020. “Response  of Gut Microbiota to Serum Metabolome Changes in Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnant Patients.” World Journal of Gastroenterology 26 : 7338–7351. 10.3748/wjg.v26.i46.7338 33362388
143 Korpela, Katri , Anne Salonen , Lauri J. Virta , Riina A. Kekkonen , Kristoffer Forslund , Peer Bork , and Willem M. de Vos . 2016. “Intestinal Microbiome is Related to Lifetime Antibiotic Use in Finnish Pre‐School Children.” Nature Communication 7 : 10410. 10.1038/ncomms10410
144 Collins, Stephanie L. , Jonathan G. Stine , Jordan E. Bisanz , C. Denise Okafor , and Andrew D. Patterson . 2023. “Bile Acids and the Gut Microbiota: Metabolic Interactions and Impacts on Disease.” Nature Reviews Microbiology 21 : 236–247. 10.1038/s41579-022-00805-x 36253479
145 Huang, Fengjie , Xiaojiao Zheng , Xiaohui Ma , Runqiu Jiang , Wangyi Zhou , Shuiping Zhou , Yunjing Zhang , et al. 2019. “Theabrownin From Pu‐Erh Tea Attenuates Hypercholesterolemia Via Modulation of Gut Microbiota and Bile Acid Metabolism.” Nature Communication 10 : 4971. 10.1038/s41467-019-12896-x
146 Dong, Allan Chen , and Alex Stagnaro‐Green . 2019. “Differences in Diagnostic Criteria Mask the True Prevalence  of Thyroid Disease in Pregnancy: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis.” Thyroid 29 : 278–289. 10.1089/thy.2018.0475 30444186
147 Fenneman, Aline C. , Eveline Bruinstroop , Max Nieuwdorp , Anne H. van der Spek , and Anita Boelen . 2023. “A Comprehensive Review  of Thyroid Hormone Metabolism in the Gut and Its Clinical Implications.” Thyroid 33 : 32–44. 10.1089/thy.2022.0491 36322786
148 Liu, Qi , Wei Sun , and Hao Zhang . 2022. “Interaction  of Gut Microbiota With Endocrine Homeostasis and Thyroid Cancer.” Cancers 14 : 2656. 10.3390/cancers14112656 35681636
149 Wang, Biao , Yajuan Xu , Xiaofeng Hou , Jingjing Li , Yanjun Cai , Yingqi Hao , Qian Ouyang , et al. 2021. “Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth in Subclinical Hypothyroidism  of Pregnant Women.” Frontiers in Endocrinology 12 : 604070. 10.3389/fendo.2021.604070 34108932
150 Wu, Min , Yuxi Yang , Yali Fan , Shan Guo , Tianhe Li , Muqing Gu , Tingting Zhang , Huimin Gao , Ruixia Liu , and Chenghong Yin . 2022. “Characteristics  of the Intestinal Flora  of TPOAb‐Positive Women with Subclinical Hypothyroidism in the Second Trimester  of Pregnancy: A Single‐Center Prospective Cohort Study.” Frontiers in Cellular & Infection Microbiology 12 : 794170. 10.3389/fcimb.2022.794170 35663464
151 Cai, Yanjun , Yajuan Xu , Yanjie Ban , Jingjing Li , Zongzong Sun , Miao Zhang , Biao Wang , et al. 2022. “Plasma Lipid Profile and Intestinal Microflora in Pregnancy Women With Hypothyroidism and Their Correlation With Pregnancy Outcomes.” Frontiers in Endocrinology 12 : 792536. 10.3389/fendo.2021.792536 35126311
152 Huo, Dongxue , Chaoping Cen , Haibo Chang , Qianying Ou , Shuaiming Jiang , Yonggui Pan , Kaining Chen , and Jiachao Zhang . 2021. “Probiotic Bifidobacterium longum Supplied With Methimazole Improved the Thyroid Function of Graves' Disease Patients Through the Gut–Thyroid Axis.” Communications Biology 4 : 1046. 10.1038/s42003-021-02587-z 34493790
153 Ronzoni, Stefania , Teresa Cobo , Rohan D'Souza , Elizabeth Asztalos , Susan E. O'Rinn , Ana Herranz , and Xingshan Cao . 2022. “Individualized Treatment of Preterm Premature Rupture of Membranes to Prolong the Latency Period, Reduce the Rate of Preterm Birth, and Improve Neonatal Outcomes.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 227 : 296.e1–296.e18. 10.1016/j.ajog.2022.02.037
154 Doyle, Ronan M. , Kathryn Harris , Steve Kamiza , Ulla Harjunmaa , Ulla Ashorn , Minyanga Nkhoma , Kathryn G. Dewey , Kenneth Maleta , Per Ashorn , and Nigel Klein . 2017. “Bacterial Communities Found in Placental Tissues are Associated With Severe Chorioamnionitis and Adverse Birth Outcomes.” PLos One 12 : e0180167. 10.1371/journal.pone.0180167 28700642
155 Lim, Efrem S. , Cynthia Rodriguez , and Lori R. Holtz . 2018. “Amniotic Fluid From Healthy Term Pregnancies Does Not Harbor a Detectable Microbial Community.” Microbiome 6 : 87. 10.1186/s40168-018-0475-7 29751830
156 Clemente, Jose C. , Luke K. Ursell , Laura Wegener Parfrey , and Rob Knight . 2012. “The Impact of the Gut Microbiota on Human Health: An Integrative View.” Cell 148 : 1258–1270. 10.1016/j.cell.2012.01.035 22424233
157 Dunlop, Anne L. , Jennifer G. Mulle , Erin P. Ferranti , Sara Edwards , Alexis B. Dunn , and Elizabeth J. Corwin . 2015. “Maternal Microbiome and Pregnancy Outcomes That Impact Infant Health: A Review.” Advances in Neonatal Care 15 : 377–385. 10.1097/ANC.0000000000000218 26317856
158 DiGiulio, Daniel B. , Roberto Romero , Juan Pedro Kusanovic , Ricardo Gómez , Chong Jai Kim , Kimberley S. Seok , Francesca Gotsch , et al. 2010. “Prevalence and Diversity of Microbes in the Amniotic Fluid, the Fetal Inflammatory Response, and Pregnancy Outcome in Women With Preterm Pre‐Labor Rupture of Membranes.” American Journal of Reproductive Immunology 64 : 38–57. 10.1111/j.1600-0897.2010.00830.x 20331587
159 Baud, David , and Gilbert Greub . 2011. “Intracellular Bacteria and Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes.” Clinical Microbiology and Infection 17 : 1312–1322. 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2011.03604.x 21884294
160 Vitali, Beatrice , Federica Cruciani , Maria Baldassarre , Teresa Capursi , Enzo Spisni , Maria Valerii , Marco Candela , Silvia Turroni , and Patrizia Brigidi . 2012. “Dietary Supplementation with Probiotics During Late Pregnancy: Outcome on Vaginal Microbiota and Cytokine Secretion.” BMC Microbiology 12 : 236. 10.1186/1471-2180-12-236 23078375
161 Brown, Richard G. , Julian R. Marchesi , Yun S. Lee , Ann Smith , Benjamin Lehne , Lindsay M. Kindinger , Vasso Terzidou , et al. 2018. “Vaginal Dysbiosis Increases Risk of Preterm Fetal Membrane Rupture, Neonatal Sepsis and is Exacerbated by Erythromycin.” BMC Med 16 : 9. 10.1186/s12916-017-0999-x 29361936
162 Paramel Jayaprakash, Teenus , Emily C. Wagner , Julie van Schalkwyk , Arianne Y. K. Albert , Janet E. Hill , and Deborah M. Money , PPROM Study Group . 2016. “High Diversity and Variability in the Vaginal Microbiome in Women Following Preterm Premature Rupture of Membranes (PPROM): A Prospective Cohort Study.” PLos One 11 : e0166794. 10.1371/journal.pone.0166794 27861554
163 Brown, Richard G. , Maya Al‐Memar , Julian R. Marchesi , Yun S. Lee , Ann Smith , Denise Chan , and Holly Lewis , et al. 2019. “Establishment  of Vaginal Microbiota Composition in Early Pregnancy and Its Association With Subsequent Preterm Prelabor Rupture of the Fetal Membranes.” Translational Research 207 : 30–43. 10.1016/j.trsl.2018.12.005 30633889
164 Wu, Xinrui , Qi Li , Dihui Lin , Jiawang Cai , Houxiang Huang , and Hongzhuan Tan . 2023. “Gut Microbiota and Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy: Evidence From the Mendelian Randomization Study.” Aging 15 : 9105–9127. 10.18632/aging.205019 37698537
165 Lin, Huijun , Junru Chen , Shujuan Ma , Rongjing An , Xingli Li , and Hongzhuan Tan . 2022. “The Association between Gut Microbiome and Pregnancy‐Induced Hypertension: A Nested Case–Control Study.” Nutrients 14 : 4582. 10.3390/nu14214582 36364844
166 Yang, Xu , Mingzhi Zhang , Yuqing Zhang , Hongcheng Wei , Quanquan Guan , Chao Dong , Siting Deng , Hein Min Tun , and Yankai Xia . 2023. “Ecological Change of the Gut Microbiota During Pregnancy and Progression to Dyslipidemia.” NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes 9 : 14. 10.1038/s41522-023-00383-7 37012285
167 Zhou, Liyuan , and Xinhua Xiao . 2018. “The Role of Gut Microbiota in the Effects of Maternal Obesity During Pregnancy on Offspring Metabolism.” Bioscience Reports 38 : BSR20171234. 10.1042/BSR20171234 29208770
168 Liu, He , Li‐Long Pan , Siting Lv , Qin Yang , Hao Zhang , Wei Chen , Zhuwu Lv , and Jia Sun . 2019. “Alterations  of Gut Microbiota and Blood Lipidome in Gestational Diabetes Mellitus With Hyperlipidemia.” Frontiers in Physiology 10 : 1015. 10.3389/fphys.2019.01015 31447702
169 Li, Hua‐Ping , Xuan Chen , and Ming‐Qing Li . 2013. “Butyrate Alleviates Metabolic Impairments and Protects Pancreatic Beta Cell Function in Pregnant Mice With Obesity.” The International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Pathology 6 : 1574–1584. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23923076 23923076
170 Han, Man‐Man , Jin‐Fang Sun , Xiang‐Hui Su , You‐Fan Peng , Hemant Goyal , Chun‐Hua Wu , Xiang‐Yun Zhu , and Ling Li . 2019. “Probiotics Improve Glucose and Lipid Metabolism in Pregnant Women: A Meta‐Analysis.” Annals of Translation Medicine 7 : 99. 10.21037/atm.2019.01.61
171 Mu, Jinhao , Xian Guo , Yanbing Zhou , and Guoxia Cao . 2023. “The Effects  of Probiotics/Synbiotics on Glucose and Lipid Metabolism in Women With Gestational Diabetes Mellitus: A Meta‐Analysis  of Randomized Controlled Trials.” Nutrients 15 : 1375. 10.3390/nu15061375 36986107
172 Singer, Mervyn , Clifford S. Deutschman , Christopher Warren Seymour , Manu Shankar‐Hari , Djillal Annane , Michael Bauer , Rinaldo Bellomo , et al. 2016. “The Third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis‐3).” JAMA 315 : 801–810. 10.1001/jama.2016.0287 26903338
173 Greer, Orene , Nishel Mohan Shah , and Mark R. Johnson . 2019. “Maternal Sepsis Update: Current Management and Controversies.” The Obstetrician & Gynaecologist 22 : 45–55. 10.1111/tog.12623
174 Doran, Kelly S. , and Victor Nizet . 2004. “Molecular Pathogenesis of Neonatal Group B Streptococcal Infection: No Longer in Its Infancy.” Molecular Microbiology 54 : 23–31. 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04266.x 15458402
175 Ulett, Glen C. , Richard I. Webb , Kimberly B. Ulett , Xiangqin Cui , William H. Benjamin , Michael Crowley , and Mark A. Schembri . 2010. “Group B Streptococcus (GBS) Urinary Tract Infection Involves Binding  of GBS to Bladder Uroepithelium and Potent But GBS‐Specific Induction  of Interleukin 1α.” The Journal of Infectious Disease 201 : 866–870. 10.1086/650696
176 Chen, Xia , Rong Wu , Lei Li , Yunong Zeng , Jingrui Chen , Mingyuan Wei , Yinglin Feng , et al. 2023. “Pregnancy‐Induced Changes to the Gut Microbiota Drive Macrophage Pyroptosis and Exacerbate Septic Inflammation.” Immunity 56 : 336–352.e9. 10.1016/j.immuni.2023.01.015 36792573
177 Derksen, R. H. , R. J. Hené , C. G. Kallenberg , R. M. Valentijn , and L. Kater . 1988. “Prospective Multicentre Trial on the Short‐Term Effects of Plasma Exchange Versus Cytotoxic Drugs in Steroid‐Resistant Lupus Nephritis.” The Netherlands Journal of Medicine 33 : 168–177. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3067098 3067098
178 Sharma, Deepak , Sweta Shastri , and Pradeep Sharma . 2016. “Intrauterine Growth Restriction: Antenatal and Postnatal Aspects.” Clinical Medicine Insights: Pediatrics 10 : 67–83. 10.4137/CMPed.S40070 27441006
179 Tu, Xinzhi , Chun Duan , Bingying Lin , Kangfeng Li , Jie Gao , Huaying Yan , Kejian Wang , and Zhao Zhao . 2022. “Characteristics  of the Gut Microbiota in Pregnant Women With Fetal Growth Restriction.” BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 22 : 297. 10.1186/s12884-022-04635-w 35392848
180 den Hollander, Wouter J. , Sarah Schalekamp‐Timmermans , I. Lisanne Holster , Vincent W. Jaddoe , Albert Hofman , Henriëtte A. Moll , Guillermo I. Perez‐Perez , Martin J. Blaser , Eric A. P. Steegers , and Ernst J. Kuipers . 2017. “ Helicobacter pylori Colonization and Pregnancies Complicated by Preeclampsia, Spontaneous Prematurity, and Small for Gestational Age Birth.” Helicobacter 22 : e12364. 10.1111/hel.12364
181 Yang, Jing , Lingling Hou , Jinfeng Wang , Liwen Xiao , Jinyang Zhang , Nanlin Yin , Su Yao , et al. 2022. “Unfavourable Intrauterine Environment Contributes to Abnormal Gut Microbiome and Metabolome in Twins.” Gut 71 : 2451–2462. 10.1136/gutjnl-2021-326482 35387876
182 Altemani, Faisal , Helen L. Barrett , Luisa Gomez‐Arango , Peter Josh , H. David McIntyre , Leonie K. Callaway , Mark Morrison , Gene W. Tyson , and Marloes Dekker Nitert . 2021. “Pregnant Women who Develop Preeclampsia Have Lower Abundance of the Butyrate‐Producer Coprococcus  in Their Gut Microbiota.” Pregnancy Hypertension 23 : 211–219. 10.1016/j.preghy.2021.01.002 33530034
183 He, Xin , Zhengpeng Li , Xiaohui Li , Huanying Zhao , Yanan Hu , Wenli Han , Chen Wang , Chenghong Yin , and Yi Chen . 2023. “The Fecal Microbiota of Gravidas With Fetal Growth Restriction Newborns Characterized by Metagenomic Sequencing.” Current Research in Translational Medicine 71 : 103354. 10.1016/j.retram.2022.103354 36434943
184 Zhang, Hao , Xiaoyun Liu , Yi Zheng , Xia Zha , Mabrouk Elsabagh , Ying Zhang , Yi Ma , Juan J. Loor , Mengzhi Wang , and Hongrong Wang . 2022. “Effects  of the Maternal Gut Microbiome and Gut–Placental Axis on Melatonin Efficacy in Alleviating Cadmium‐Induced Fetal Growth Restriction.” Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 237 : 113550. 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2022.113550 35487173
185 Melchor, J. C. , A. Khalil , D. Wing , E. Schleussner , and D. Surbek . 2018. “Prediction  of Preterm Delivery in Symptomatic Women Using PAMG‐1, Fetal Fibronectin and phIGFBP‐1 Tests: Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis.” Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology 52 : 442–451. 10.1002/uog.19119 29920825
186 Integrative HMP (iHMP) Research Network Consortium . 2019. “The Integrative Human Microbiome Project.” Nature 569 : 641–648. 10.1038/s41586-019-1238-8 31142853
187 Shiozaki, Arihiro , Satoshi Yoneda , Noriko Yoneda , Rika Yonezawa , Takamichi Matsubayashi , Genichiro Seo , and Shigeru Saito . 2014. “Intestinal Microbiota is Different in Women With Preterm Birth: Results From Terminal Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism Analysis.” PLos One 9 : e111374. 10.1371/journal.pone.0111374 25372390
188 Bayar, Erna , Phillip R. Bennett , Denise Chan , Lynne Sykes , and David A. MacIntyre . 2020. “The Pregnancy Microbiome and Preterm Birth.” Seminars in Immunopathology 42 : 487–499. 10.1007/s00281-020-00817-w 32797272
189 Hiltunen, Henni , Maria Carmen Collado , Helena Ollila , Terhi Kolari , Satu Tölkkö , Erika Isolauri , Seppo Salminen , and Samuli Rautava . 2022. “Spontaneous Preterm Delivery is Reflected in Both Early Neonatal and Maternal Gut Microbiota.” Pediatric Research 91 : 1804–1811. 10.1038/s41390-021-01663-8 34349229
190 de Onis, M. , M. Blössner , and J. Villar . 1998. “Levels and Patterns of Intrauterine Growth Retardation in Developing Countries.” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 52 (Suppl 1 ): S5–S15. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9511014 9511014
191 Arifeen, Shams E. , Robert E. Black , Laura E. Caulfield , Gretchen Antelman , Abdullah H. Baqui , Quamrun Nahar , Shamsuddin Alamgir , and Hasan Mahmud . 2000. “Infant Growth Patterns in the Slums of Dhaka  in Relation to Birth Weight, Intrauterine Growth Retardation, and Prematurity.” The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 72 : 1010–1017. 10.1093/ajcn/72.4.1010 11010945
192 Gershuni, Victoria , Yun Li , Michal Elovitz , Hongzhe Li , Gary D. Wu , and Charlene W. Compher . 2021. “Maternal Gut Microbiota Reflecting Poor Diet Quality is Associated with Spontaneous Preterm Birth in a Prospective Cohort Study.” The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 113 : 602–611. 10.1093/ajcn/nqaa361 33515003
193 Pinto, Yishay , Sigal Frishman , Sondra Turjeman , Adi Eshel , Meital Nuriel‐Ohayon , Oshrit Shtossel , Oren Ziv , et al. 2023. “Gestational Diabetes is Driven by Microbiota‐Induced Inflammation Months before Diagnosis.” Gut 72 : 918–928. 10.1136/gutjnl-2022-328406 36627187
194 Lv, Li‐Juan , Sheng‐Hui Li , Ji‐Ying Wen , Guang‐Yang Wang , Hui Li , Tian‐Wen He , Qing‐Bo Lv , et al. 2022. “Deep Metagenomic Characterization of Gut Microbial Community and Function in Preeclampsia.” Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 12 : 933523. 10.3389/fcimb.2022.933523 36189343
195 Chen, Siqian , Jialin Li , Shuaijun Ren , Yajie Gao , Yuping Zhou , and Rongrong Xuan . 2023. “Expression and Clinical Significance of Short‐Chain Fatty Acids in Pregnancy Complications.” Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 12 : 1071029. 10.3389/fcimb.2022.1071029 36710961
196 Mokkala, Kati , Niklas Paulin , Noora Houttu , Ella Koivuniemi , Outi Pellonperä , Sofia Khan , Sami Pietilä , Kristiina Tertti , Laura L. Elo , and Kirsi Laitinen . 2020. “Metagenomics Analysis of Gut Microbiota in Response to Diet Intervention and Gestational Diabetes in Overweight and Obese Women: A Randomised, Double‐Blind, Placebo‐Controlled Clinical Trial.” Gut 70 : 309–318. 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-321643 32839200
197 Bradley C., Johnston , Alison L. Supina , and Sunita Vohra . 2006. “Probiotics for Pediatric Antibiotic‐Associated Diarrhea: A Meta‐Analysis of Randomized Placebo‐Controlled Trials.” Canadian Medical Association Journal 175 : 377–383. 10.1503/cmaj.051603 16908901
198 Karamali, M. , F. Dadkhah , M. Sadrkhanlou , M. Jamilian , S. Ahmadi , M. Tajabadi‐Ebrahimi , P. Jafari , and Z. Asemi . 2016. “Effects  of Probiotic Supplementation on Glycaemic Control and Lipid Profiles in Gestational Diabetes: A Randomized, Double‐Blind, Placebo‐Controlled Trial.” Diabetes & Metabolism 42 : 234–241. 10.1016/j.diabet.2016.04.009 27209439
199 Babadi, Mahtab , Ahmad Khorshidi , Esmat Aghadavood , Mansooreh Samimi , Elham Kavossian , Fereshteh Bahmani , Alireza Mafi , Rana Shafabakhsh , Mahbobeh Satari , and Zatollah Asemi . 2019. “The Effects  of Probiotic Supplementation on Genetic and Metabolic Profiles in Patients With Gestational Diabetes Mellitus: A Randomized, Double‐Blind, Placebo‐Controlled Trial.” Probiotics and Antimicrobial Proteins 11 : 1227–1235. 10.1007/s12602-018-9490-z 30535534
200 Brantsaeter, Anne Lise , Ronny Myhre , Margaretha Haugen , Solveig Myking , Verena Sengpiel , Per Magnus , Bo Jacobsson , and Helle Margrete Meltzer . 2011. “Intake  of Probiotic Food and Risk of Preeclampsia in Primiparous Women: The Norwegian Mother and Child Cohort Study.” American Journal of Epidemiology 174 : 807–815. 10.1093/aje/kwr168 21821542
201 Callaway, Leonie K. , H. David McIntyre , Helen L. Barrett , Katie Foxcroft , Anne Tremellen , Barbara E. Lingwood , Jacinta M. Tobin , et al. 2019. “Probiotics for the Prevention  of Gestational Diabetes Mellitus in Overweight and Obese Women: Findings From the SPRING Double‐Blind Randomized Controlled Trial.” Diabetes Care 42 : 364–371. 10.2337/dc18-2248 30659070
202 Taylor, Bonnie , Georgia Woodfall , Katherine Sheedy , Meggan O'Riley , Kelsie Rainbow , Elsa Bramwell , and Nicole Kellow . 2017. “Effect  of Probiotics on Metabolic Outcomes in Pregnant Women With Gestational Diabetes: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis  of Randomized Controlled Trials.” Nutrients 9 : 461. 10.3390/nu9050461 28475161
203 Masulli, Maria , Ester Vitacolonna , Federica Fraticelli , Giuseppe Della Pepa , Edoardo Mannucci , and Matteo Monami . 2020. “Effects  of Probiotic Supplementation during Pregnancy on Metabolic Outcomes: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.” Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice 162 : 108111. 10.1016/j.diabres.2020.108111 32194215
204 Jarde, Alexander , Anne‐Mary Lewis‐Mikhael , Paul Moayyedi , Jennifer C. Stearns , Stephen M. Collins , Joseph Beyene , and Sarah D. McDonald . 2018. “Pregnancy Outcomes in Women Taking Probiotics or Prebiotics: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis.” BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 18 : 14. 10.1186/s12884-017-1629-5 29310610
205 Lindsay, Karen L. , Colin A. Walsh , Lorraine Brennan , and Fionnuala M. McAuliffe . 2013. “Probiotics  in Pregnancy and Maternal Outcomes: A Systematic Review.” The Journal of Maternal‐Fetal & Neonatal Medicine 26 : 772–778. 10.3109/14767058.2012.755166 23205866
206 Brosseau, Carole , Amandine Selle , Angeline Duval , Barbara Misme‐Aucouturier , Melanie Chesneau , Sophie Brouard , Claire Cherbuy , et al. 2021. “Prebiotic Supplementation during Pregnancy Modifies the Gut Microbiota and Increases Metabolites in Amniotic Fluid, Driving a Tolerogenic Environment in Utero.” Frontiers in Immunology 12 : 712614. 10.3389/fimmu.2021.712614 34335628
207 Maragkoudaki, Xanthi , Matthew Naylor , Georgia Papacleovoulou , Emilie Stolarczyk , Douglas Rees , Joaquim M. Pombo , Shadi Abu‐Hayyeh , et al. 2020. “Supplementation With a Prebiotic (Polydextrose) in Obese Mouse Pregnancy Improves Maternal Glucose Homeostasis and Protects Against Offspring Obesity.” International Journal of Obesity 44 : 2382–2393. 10.1038/s41366-020-00682-5 33033395
208 Maurer, Alannah D. , and Raylene A. Reimer . 2011. “Maternal Consumption of High‐Prebiotic Fibre or ‐Protein Diets During Pregnancy and Lactation Differentially Influences Satiety Hormones and Expression of Genes Involved in Glucose and Lipid Metabolism in Offspring in Rats.” British Journal of Nutrition 105 : 329–338. 10.1017/S0007114510003533 21129233
209 Beaumont, Martin , Eugeni Roura , William Lambert , Conny Turni , Joris Michiels , and Tristan Chalvon‐Demersay . 2022. “Selective Nourishing of Gut Microbiota With Amino Acids: A Novel Prebiotic Approach?” Frontiers in Nutrition 9 : 1066898. 10.3389/fnut.2022.1066898 36601082
210 Zhang, Runzhi , Xi Gao , Hong Bai , and Kang Ning . 2020. “Traditional Chinese Medicine and Gut Microbiome: Their Respective and Concert Effects on Healthcare.” Frontiers in Pharmacology 11 : 538. 10.3389/fphar.2020.00538 32390855
211 Li, Yun , Tianyu Liu , Chen Yan , Runxiang Xie , Zixuan Guo , Sinan Wang , Yujie Zhang , Zhengxiang Li , Bangmao Wang , and Hailong Cao . 2018. “Diammonium Glycyrrhizinate Protects against Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease in Mice through Modulation  of Gut Microbiota and Restoration  of Intestinal Barrier.” Molecular Pharmaceutics 15 : 3860–3870. 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.8b00347 30036479
212 Chen, Xiaoxia , Chun Chen , and Xiong Fu . 2022. ““Hypoglycemic Effect of the Polysaccharides From Astragalus membranaceus on Type 2 Diabetic Mice Based on the “Gut Microbiota–Mucosal Barrier”.” Food & Function 13 : 10121–10133. 10.1039/d2fo02300h 36106494
213 Song, Qianbo , Sau Wan Cheng , Dan Li , Huiyuan Cheng , Yuen Sze Lai , Quanbin Han , Hoi Yan Wu , Pang Chui Shaw , and Zhong Zuo . 2022. “Gut Microbiota Mediated Hypoglycemic Effect of Astragalus membranaceus Polysaccharides in Db/Db Mice.” Front Pharmacol 13 : 1043527. 10.3389/fphar.2022.1043527 36452223
214 Han, Cong , Yue‐Hua Jiang , Wei Li , Yao Liu , and Zhen‐Qiang Qi . 2019. “Study on the Antihypertensive Mechanism  of Astragalus membranaceus and Salvia miltiorrhiza Based on Intestinal Flora–Host Metabolism.” Evidence‐Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2019 : 1–16. 10.1155/2019/5418796
215 Marco, Maria L. , Mary Ellen Sanders , Michael Gänzle , Marie Claire Arrieta , Paul D. Cotter , Luc De Vuyst , Colin Hill , et al. 2021. “The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) Consensus Statement on Fermented Foods.” Nature Reviews Gastroenterology & Hepatology 18 : 196–208. 10.1038/s41575-020-00390-5 33398112
216 Dimidi, Eirini , Selina Cox , Megan Rossi , and Kevin Whelan . 2019. “Fermented Foods: Definitions and Characteristics, Impact on the Gut Microbiota and Effects on Gastrointestinal Health and Disease.” Nutrients 11 : 1806. 10.3390/nu11081806 31387262
217 Estruch, Ramon , and Rosa M. Lamuela‐Raventós . 2023. “Cardiovascular Benefits of Fermented Foods and Beverages: Still Up for Debate.” Nature Reviews Cardiology 20 : 789–790. 10.1038/s41569-023-00938-3
218 Gille, Doreen , Alexandra Schmid , Barbara Walther , and Guy Vergères . 2018. “Fermented Food and Non‐Communicable Chronic Diseases: A Review.” Nutrients 10 : 448. 10.3390/nu10040448 29617330
219 Manara, Serena , Marta Selma‐Royo , Kun D. Huang , Francesco Asnicar , Federica Armanini , Aitor Blanco‐Miguez , Fabio Cumbo , et al. 2023. “Maternal and Food Microbial Sources Shape the Infant Microbiome of a Rural Ethiopian Population.” Current Biology 33 : 1939–1950.e4. 10.1016/j.cub.2023.04.011 37116481
220 Ferro, Lynn E. , Liana N. Crowley , Kyle Bittinger , Elliot S. Friedman , Jessica E. Decker , Kathryn Russel , Sarah Katz , Jae Kyeom Kim , and Jillian C. Trabulsi . 2023. “Effects  of Prebiotics, Probiotics, and Synbiotics on the Infant Gut Microbiota and Other Health Outcomes: A Systematic Review.” Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 63 : 5620–5642. 10.1080/10408398.2021.2022595 37667870
221 Wan, Jiayang , Lin An , Zhenghong Ren , Shuxian Wang , Huixia Yang , and Jingmei Ma . 2023. “Effects  of Galactooligosaccharides on Maternal Gut Microbiota, Glucose Metabolism, Lipid Metabolism and Inflammation in Pregnancy: A Randomized Controlled Pilot Study.” Frontiers in Endocrinology 14 : 1034266. 10.3389/fendo.2023.1034266 36777355
222 Sharif, Sahar , Paul T. Heath , Sam J. Oddie , and William McGuire . 2022. “Synbiotics to Prevent Necrotising Enterocolitis in Very Preterm or Very Low Birth Weight Infants.” Cochrane Database of Systematic Review 2022 : CD014067. 10.1002/14651858.CD014067.pub2
223 Nabhani, Zohoor , Seyed Jamal Ghaemmaghami Hezaveh , Elham Razmpoosh , Mohammad Asghari‐Jafarabadi , and Bahram Pourghassem Gargari . 2018. “The Effects of Synbiotic Supplementation on Insulin Resistance/Sensitivity, Lipid Profile and Total Antioxidant Capacity in Women with Gestational Diabetes Mellitus: A Randomized Double Blind Placebo Controlled Clinical Trial.” Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice 138 : 149–157. 10.1016/j.diabres.2018.02.008 29432772
224 Karamali, Maryam , Nabiollah Nasiri , Naemeh Taghavi Shavazi , Mehri Jamilian , Fereshteh Bahmani , Maryam Tajabadi‐Ebrahimi , and Zatollah Asemi . 2018. “The Effects  of Synbiotic Supplementation on Pregnancy Outcomes on Gestational Diabetes.” Probiotics and Antimicrobial Proteins 10 : 496–503. 10.1007/s12602-017-9313-7 28786012
225 Eratte, Divya , Kim Dowling , Colin J. Barrow , and Benu P. Adhikari . 2017. “In‐Vitro Digestion of Probiotic Bacteria and Omega‐3 Oil Co‐Microencapsulated in Whey Protein Isolate‐Gum Arabic Complex Coacervates.” Food Chemistry 227 : 129–136. 10.1016/j.foodchem.2017.01.080 28274412
226 van Nood, Els , Anne Vrieze , Max Nieuwdorp , Susana Fuentes , Erwin G. Zoetendal , Willem M. de Vos , Caroline E. Visser , et al. 2013. “Duodenal Infusion of Donor Feces for Recurrent Clostridium difficile .” New England Journal of Medicine 368 : 407–415. 10.1056/NEJMoa1205037 23323867
227 Smits, Loek P. , Kristien E. C. Bouter , Willem M. de Vos , Thomas J. Borody , and Max Nieuwdorp . 2013. “Therapeutic Potential of Fecal Microbiota Transplantation.” Gastroenterology 145 : 946–953. 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.08.058 24018052
228 Korpela, Katri , Otto Helve , Kaija‐Leena Kolho , Terhi Saisto , Kirsi Skogberg , Evgenia Dikareva , Vedran Stefanovic , Anne Salonen , Sture Andersson , and Willem M. de Vos . 2020. “Maternal Fecal Microbiota Transplantation in Cesarean‐Born Infants Rapidly Restores Normal Gut Microbial Development: A Proof‐of‐Concept Study.” Cell 183 : 324–334.e5. 10.1016/j.cell.2020.08.047 33007265
229 Zhang, Ting , Gaochen Lu , Zhe Zhao , Yafei Liu , Quan Shen , Pan Li , Yaoyao Chen , et al. 2020. “Washed Microbiota Transplantation vs. Manual Fecal Microbiota Transplantation: Clinical Findings, Animal Studies and  In Vitro Screening.” Protein Cell 11 : 251–266. 10.1007/s13238-019-00684-8 31919742
230 Zhong, Hao‐Jie , Hong‐Lie Zeng , Ying‐Li Cai , Yu‐Pei Zhuang , Yu‐Ligh Liou , Qingping Wu , and Xing‐Xiang He . 2021. “Washed Microbiota Transplantation Lowers Blood Pressure in Patients With Hypertension.” Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 11 : 679624. 10.3389/fcimb.2021.679624 34458158
231 Madany, Abdullah M. , Heather K. Hughes , and Paul Ashwood . 2022. “Prenatal Maternal Antibiotics Treatment Alters the Gut Microbiota and Immune Function  of Post‐Weaned Prepubescent Offspring.” International Journal of Molecular Sciences 23 : 12879. 10.3390/ijms232112879 36361666
232 Shepilov, Dmytro , Iryna Osadchenko , Tetiana Kovalenko , Chiaki Yamada , Anastasiia Chereshynska , Kateryna Smozhanyk , Galyna Ostrovska , Stanislav Groppa , Alexandru Movila , and Galyna Skibo . 2023. “Maternal Antibiotic Administration During Gestation can Affect the Memory and Brain Structure in Mouse offspring.” Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience 17 : 1176676. 10.3389/fncel.2023.1176676 37234915
233 Faas, Marijke , Yuanrui Liu , Lieske Wekema , Gisela Weiss , Carolien van Loo‐Bouwman , and Luis Silva Lagos . 2023. “The Effect of Antibiotics Treatment on the Maternal Immune Response and Gut Microbiome in Pregnant and Non‐Pregnant Mice.” Nutrients 15 : 2723. 10.3390/nu15122723 37375627
234 Jess, Tine , Camilla S. Morgen , Maria C. Harpsøe , Thorkild I. A. Sørensen , Teresa A. Ajslev , Julie C. Antvorskov , and Kristine H. Allin . 2019. “Antibiotic Use During Pregnancy and Childhood Overweight: A Population‐Based Nationwide Cohort Study.” Scientific Report 9 : 11528. 10.1038/s41598-019-48065-9
235 Blattner, Collin M. , Melissa Danesh , Maryam Safaee , and Jenny E. Murase . 2016. “Understanding the New FDA Pregnancy and Lactation Labeling Rules.” International Journal of Women's Dermatology 2 : 5–7. 10.1016/j.ijwd.2015.12.005
236 Food and Drug Administration, HHS . 2014. “Content and Format of Labeling for Human Prescription Drug and Biological Products; Requirements for Pregnancy and Lactation Labeling. Final Rule.” Federal Register 79 : 72063–72103. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25509060 25509060
237 Cahan, Eli . 2023. “As Superbugs Flourish, Bacteriophage Therapy Recaptures Researchers' Interest.” JAMA 329 : 781–784. 10.1001/jama.2022.17756 36811929
238 Bookstaver, P. Brandon , Christopher M. Bland , Brooke Griffin , Kayla R. Stover , Lea S. Eiland , and Milena McLaughlin . 2015. “A Review  of Antibiotic Use in Pregnancy.” Pharmacotherapy 35 : 1052–1062. 10.1002/phar.1649 26598097
239 Chen, Robert Y. , Ishita Mostafa , Matthew C. Hibberd , Subhasish Das , Mustafa Mahfuz , Nurun N. Naila , M. Munirul Islam , et al. 2021. “A Microbiota‐Directed Food Intervention for Undernourished Children.” New England Journal of Medicine 384 : 1517–1528. 10.1056/NEJMoa2023294 33826814
240 Khanna, Sahil , Maha Assi , Christine Lee , David Yoho , Thomas Louie , Whitfield Knapple , Humberto Aguilar , et al. 2022. “Efficacy and Safety  of RBX2660 in PUNCH CD3, a Phase III, Randomized, Double‐Blind, Placebo‐Controlled Trial With a Bayesian Primary Analysis for the Prevention  of Recurrent Clostridioides difficile Infection.” Drugs 82 : 1527–1538. 10.1007/s40265-022-01797-x 36287379
241 Feuerstadt, Paul , Thomas J. Louie , Bret Lashner , Elaine E. L. Wang , Liyang Diao , Jessica A. Bryant , Matthew Sims , et al. 2022. “SER‐109, an Oral Microbiome Therapy for Recurrent Clostridioides difficile Infection.” New England Journal of Medicine 386 : 220–229. 10.1056/NEJMoa2106516 35045228
242 Louie, Thomas , Yoav Golan , Sahil Khanna , Dmitri Bobilev , Nathalie Erpelding , Candida Fratazzi , Meg Carini , et al. 2023. “VE303, a Defined Bacterial Consortium, for Prevention  of Recurrent Clostridioides difficile Infection: A Randomized Clinical Trial.” JAMA 329 : 1356–1366. 10.1001/jama.2023.4314 37060545
243 Sorbara, Matthew T. , and Eric G. Pamer . 2022. “Microbiome‐Based Therapeutics.” Nature Reviews Microbiology 20 : 365–380. 10.1038/s41579-021-00667-9 34992261
244 Escherich, T . 1989. “The Intestinal Bacteria  of the Neonate and Breast‐Fed Infant.” Clinical Infectious Diseases 11 : 352–356. 10.1093/clinids/11.2.352
245 Burrage, S . 1927. “Bacteria in the Supposedly Sterile Meconium.” Journal of Bacteriology 13 : 47–48.
246 Hall, Ivan C. , and Elizabeth O'Toole . 1934. “Bacterial Flora of First Specimens of Meconium Passed by Fifty New‐Born Infants.” American Journal of Diseases of Children 47 : 1279–1285.
247 Harris, John W. , and J. Howard Brown . 1927. “The Bacterial Content of the Uterus at Cesarean Section.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 13 : 133–143. 10.1016/S0002-9378(27)90506-7
248 Stroup, P. E . 1962. “Amniotic Fluid Infection and the Intact Fetal Membrane.” Obstetrics & Gynecology 19 : 736–739. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/13917871 13917871
249 Prevedourakis, C. , G. Papadimitriou and A. Ioannidou . 1970. “Isolation of Pathogenic Bacteria in the Amniotic Fluid during Pregnancy and Labor.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 106 : 400–402. 10.1016/0002-9378(70)90365-0 5410876
250 Lewis, Jay F. , Peggy Johnson , and Phyllis Miller . 1976. “Evaluation  of Amniotic Fluid for Aerobic and Anaerobic Bacteria.” American Journal of Clinical Pathology 65 : 58–63. 10.1093/ajcp/65.1.58 1108641
251 Evaldson, George R. , Anna‐Stina Malmborg , and Carl Erik Nord . 1982. “Premature Rupture of the Membranes and Ascending Infection.” BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology 89 : 793–801. 10.1111/j.1471-0528.1982.tb05028.x
252 Gravett, Michael G. , Deborah Hummel , David A. Eschenbach , and King K. Holmes . 1986. “Preterm Labor Associated With Subclinical Amniotic Fluid Infection and With Bacterial Vaginosis.” Obstetrics & Gynecology 67 : 229–237. 10.1097/00006250-198602000-00013 3003634
253 Martius, J. , and D. A. Eschenbach . 1990. “The Role of Bacterial Vaginosis as a Cause of Amniotic Fluid Infection, Chorioamnionitis and Prematurity—A Review.” Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics 247 : 1–13. 10.1007/BF02390649 2178562
254 DiGiulio, Daniel B. , Roberto Romero , Harold P. Amogan , Juan Pedro Kusanovic , Elisabeth M. Bik , Francesca Gotsch , Chong Jai Kim , Offer Erez , Sam Edwin , and David A. Relman . 2008. “Microbial Prevalence, Diversity and Abundance in Amniotic Fluid During Preterm Labor: A Molecular and Culture‐Based Investigation.” PLoS One 3 : e3056. 10.1371/journal.pone.0003056 18725970
255 Wang, Xiaowei , Catalin S. Buhimschi , Stephanie Temoin , Vineet Bhandari , Yiping W. Han , and Irina A. Buhimschi . 2013. “Comparative Microbial Analysis of Paired Amniotic Fluid and Cord Blood From Pregnancies Complicated by Preterm Birth and Early‐Onset Neonatal Sepsis.” PLoS One 8 : e56131. 10.1371/journal.pone.0056131 23437088
256 DiGiulio, Daniel B. , MariaTeresa Gervasi , Roberto Romero , Shali Mazaki‐Tovi , Edi Vaisbuch , Juan Pedro Kusanovic , Kimberley S. Seok , et al. 2010. “Microbial Invasion of the Amniotic Cavity in Preeclampsia as Assessed by Cultivation and Sequence‐Based Methods.” Journal of Perinatal Medicine 38 : 503–513. 10.1515/jpm.2010.078 20482470
257 DiGiulio, Daniel B. , MariaTeresa Gervasi , Roberto Romero , Edi Vaisbuch , Shali Mazaki‐Tovi , Juan Pedro Kusanovic , Juan Pedro Kusanovic , et al. 2010. “Microbial Invasion of the Amniotic Cavity in Pregnancies with Small‐for‐Gestational‐Age Fetuses.” Journal of Perinatal Medicine 38 : 495–502. 10.1515/jpm.2010.076 20482466
258 Lauder, Abigail P. , Aoife M. Roche , Scott Sherrill‐Mix , Aubrey Bailey , Alice L. Laughlin , Kyle Bittinger , Rita Leite , Michal A. Elovitz , Samuel Parry , and Frederic D. Bushman . 2016. “Comparison  of Placenta Samples With Contamination Controls Does Not Provide Evidence for a Distinct Placenta Microbiota.” Microbiome 4 : 29. 10.1186/s40168-016-0172-3 27338728
259 de Goffau, Marcus C. , Susanne Lager , Ulla Sovio , Francesca Gaccioli , Emma Cook , Sharon J. Peacock , Julian Parkhill , D. Stephen Charnock‐Jones , and Gordon C. S. Smith . 2019. “Human Placenta Has No Microbiome but can Contain Potential Pathogens.” Nature 572 : 329–334. 10.1038/s41586-019-1451-5 31367035
260 Kennedy, Katherine M. , Marcus C. de Goffau , Maria Elisa Perez‐Muñoz , Marie‐Claire Arrieta , Fredrik Bäckhed , Peer Bork , Thorsten Braun , et al. 2023. “Questioning the Fetal Microbiome Illustrates Pitfalls of Low‐Biomass Microbial Studies.” Nature 613 : 639–649. 10.1038/s41586-022-05546-8 36697862
261 Sterpu, Irene , Emma Fransson , Luisa W. Hugerth , Juan Du , Marcela Pereira , Liqin Cheng , Sebastian Alexandru Radu , et al. 2021. “No Evidence for a Placental Microbiome in Human Pregnancies at Term.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 224 : 296.e1–296.e23. 10.1016/j.ajog.2020.08.103
262 Stout, Molly J. , Bridget Conlon , Michele Landeau , Iris Lee , Carolyn Bower , Qiuhong Zhao , Kimberly A. Roehl , D. Michael Nelson , George A. Macones , and Indira U. Mysorekar . 2013. “Identification  of Intracellular Bacteria in the Basal Plate of the Human Placenta in Term and Preterm Gestations.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 208 : 226.e1–226.e7. 10.1016/j.ajog.2013.01.018
263 Aagaard, Kjersti , Jun Ma , Kathleen M. Antony , Radhika Ganu , Joseph Petrosino , and James Versalovic . 2014. “The Placenta Harbors a Unique Microbiome.” Science Translational Medicine 6 : 237–265. 10.1126/scitranslmed.3008599
264 Gomez‐Arango, Luisa F. , Helen L. Barrett , H. David McIntyre , Leonie K. Callaway , Mark Morrison , and Marloes Dekker Nitert . 2017. “Contributions  of the Maternal Oral and Gut Microbiome to Placental Microbial Colonization in Overweight and Obese Pregnant Women.” Scientific Report 7 : 2860. 10.1038/s41598-017-03066-4
265 Liu, Chen‐Jian , Xiao Liang , Zhao‐Yi Niu , Qing Jin , Xue‐Qin Zeng , Wen‐Xue Wang , Meng‐Yue Li , et al. 2019. “Is the Delivery Mode a Critical Factor for the Microbial Communities in the Meconium?” EBioMedicine 49 : 354–363. 10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.10.045 31685443
266 Parnell, Lindsay A. , Catherine M. Briggs , Bin Cao , Omar Delannoy‐Bruno , Andrew E. Schrieffer , and Indira U. Mysorekar . 2017. “Microbial Communities in Placentas From Term Normal Pregnancy Exhibit Spatially Variable Profiles.” Scientific Reports 7 : 11200. 10.1038/s41598-017-11514-4 28894161
267 Seferovic, Maxim D. , Ryan M. Pace , Matthew Carroll , Benjamin Belfort , Angela M. Major , Derrick M. Chu , Diana A. Racusin , et al. 2019. “Visualization  of Microbes by 16S  In Situ Hybridization in Term and Preterm Placentas without Intraamniotic Infection.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 221 : 146.e1–146.e23. 10.1016/j.ajog.2019.04.036
268 Younge, Noelle , Jessica R. McCann , Julie Ballard , Catherine Plunkett , Suhail Akhtar , Félix Araújo‐Pérez , Amy Murtha , Debra Brandon , and Patrick C. Seed . 2019. “Fetal Exposure to the Maternal Microbiota in Humans and Mice.” JCI Insight 4 : e127806. 10.1172/jci.insight.127806 31479427
269 Rackaityte, E. , J. Halkias , E. M. Fukui , V. F. Mendoza , C. Hayzelden , E. D. Crawford , K. E. Fujimura , T. D. Burt , and S. V. Lynch . 2020. “Viable Bacterial Colonization is Highly Limited in the Human Intestine in Utero.” Nature Medicine 26 : 599–607. 10.1038/s41591-020-0761-3
270 Mishra, Archita , Ghee Chuan Lai , Leong Jing Yao , Thet Tun Aung , Noam Shental , Aviva Rotter‐Maskowitz , Edwin Shepherdson , et al. 2021. “Microbial Exposure During Early Human Development Primes Fetal Immune Cells.” Cell 184 : 3394–3409.e20. 10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.039 34077752
271 La, Xuena , Yuezhu Wang , Xu Xiong , Liandi Shen , Weiyi Chen , Lifeng Zhang , Fengyun Yang , Xushan Cai , Huajun Zheng , and Hong Jiang . 2022. “The Composition  of Placental Microbiota and Its Association With Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes.” Frontiers in Microbiology 13 : 911852. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.911852 35923403
272 Stupak, Aleksandra , Tomasz Gęca , Anna Kwaśniewska , Radosław Mlak , Paweł Piwowarczyk , Robert Nawrot , Anna Goździcka‐Józefiak , and Wojciech Kwaśniewski . 2023. “Comparative Analysis  of the Placental Microbiome in Pregnancies With Late Fetal Growth Restriction Versus Physiological Pregnancies.” International Journal of Molecular Sciences 24 : 6922. 10.3390/ijms24086922 37108086
273 Xiao, Liwen , and Fangqing Zhao . 2023. “Microbial Transmission, Colonisation and Succession: From Pregnancy to Infancy.” Gut 72 : 772–786. 10.1136/gutjnl-2022-328970 36720630
274 Li, Junhua , Fangming Yang , Minfeng Xiao , and Aixin Li . 2022. “Advances and Challenges in Cataloging the Human Gut Virome.” Cell Host & Microbe 30 : 908–916. 10.1016/j.chom.2022.06.003 35834962
275 Wu, Na , Heng Mo , Qing Mu , Peng Liu , Guoli Liu , and Weidong Yu . 2022. “The Gut Mycobiome Characterization  of Gestational Diabetes Mellitus and its Association With Dietary Intervention.” Frontiers in Microbiology 13 : 892859. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.892859 35783435
276 Rasmussen, Torben Sølbeck , Caroline Märta Junker Mentzel , Witold Kot , Josué Leonardo Castro‐Mejía , Simone Zuffa , Jonathan Richard Swann , Lars Hestbjerg Hansen , Finn Kvist Vogensen , Axel Kornerup Hansen , and Dennis Sandris Nielsen . 2020. “Faecal Virome Transplantation Decreases Symptoms of Type 2 Diabetes and Obesity in a Murine Model.” Gut 69 : 2122–2130. 10.1136/gutjnl-2019-320005 32165408
277 Borin, Joshua M. , Roland Liu , Yanhan Wang , Tsung‐Chin Wu , Jessica Chopyk , Lina Huang , Peiting Kuo , et al. 2023. “Fecal Virome Transplantation is Sufficient to Alter Fecal Microbiota and Drive Lean and Obese Body Phenotypes in Mice.” Gut Microbes 15 : 2236750. 10.1080/19490976.2023.2236750 37475473
278 Rasmussen, Torben Sølbeck , Caroline M. Junker Mentzel , Malene Refslund Danielsen , Rasmus Riemer Jakobsen , Line Sidsel Fisker Zachariassen , Josue Leonardo Castro Mejia , Anders Brunse , et al. 2023. “Fecal Virome Transfer Improves Proliferation of Commensal Gut Akkermansia muciniphila and Unexpectedly Enhances the Fertility Rate in Laboratory Mice.” Gut Microbes 15 : 2208504. 10.1080/19490976.2023.2208504 37150906
279 Gao, Yunyun , Danyi Li , and Yong‐Xin Liu . 2023. “Microbiome Research Outlook: Past, Present, and Future.” Protein Cell 14 : 709–712. 10.1093/procel/pwad031 37219087
280 Liu, Yong‐Xin , Tong Chen , Danyi Li , Jingyuan Fu , and Shuang‐Jiang Liu . 2022. “Imeta: Integrated Meta‐Omics for Biology and Environments.” iMeta 1 : e15. 10.1002/imt2.15 38867730
