
==== Front
PLoS One
PLoS One
plos
PLOS ONE
1932-6203
Public Library of Science San Francisco, CA USA

10.1371/journal.pone.0304159
PONE-D-23-31626
Study Protocol
Medicine and Health Sciences
Surgical and Invasive Medical Procedures
Ecology and Environmental Sciences
Sustainability Science
Medicine and Health Sciences
Health Care
Patients
Research and Analysis Methods
Research Design
Clinical Research Design
Adverse Events
Medicine and Health Sciences
Health Care
Health Care Facilities
People and places
Geographical locations
Europe
European Union
Medicine and Health Sciences
Health Care
Health Care Facilities
Hospitals
Biology and Life Sciences
Neuroscience
Cognitive Science
Cognitive Psychology
Learning
Human Learning
Biology and Life Sciences
Psychology
Cognitive Psychology
Learning
Human Learning
Social Sciences
Psychology
Cognitive Psychology
Learning
Human Learning
Biology and Life Sciences
Neuroscience
Learning and Memory
Learning
Human Learning
Improving quality and patient safety in surgical care through standardisation and harmonisation of perioperative care (SAFEST project): A research protocol for a mixed methods study
Improving quality and patient safety in surgical care: The SAFEST project research protocol
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4393-3690
Valli Claudia Writing – original draft Writing – review & editing 1 2 *
Schäfer Willemijn L. A. Conceptualization Methodology Writing – original draft Writing – review & editing 3 4
Bañeres Joaquim Conceptualization Methodology Writing – original draft Writing – review & editing 1 2 5
Groene Oliver Conceptualization Methodology Writing – original draft Writing – review & editing 6 7
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8016-4472
Arnal-Velasco Daniel Conceptualization Methodology Writing – original draft Writing – review & editing 8
Leite Andreia Conceptualization Methodology Writing – review & editing 9 10
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1902-833X
Suñol Rosa Conceptualization Methodology Writing – review & editing 1 2 5
Ballester Marta Writing – review & editing 1 2 5
Gibert Guilera Marc Writing – review & editing 1 2
Wagner Cordula Conceptualization Writing – review & editing 3
Calsbeek Hiske Conceptualization Methodology Writing – review & editing 11
Emond Yvette Methodology Writing – review & editing 11
J. Heideveld-Chevalking Anita Writing – review & editing 12
Kristensen Kaja Conceptualization Methodology Writing – original draft Writing – review & editing 6
Huibertina Davida van Tuyl Lilian Conceptualization Methodology Writing – review & editing 3
Põlluste Kaja Methodology Writing – review & editing 13
Weynants Cathy Conceptualization Writing – review & editing 14
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6623-661X
Garel Pascal Conceptualization Writing – review & editing 15
Sousa Paulo Writing – review & editing 9
Talving Peep Conceptualization Writing – review & editing 16 17
Marx David Conceptualization Methodology Writing – review & editing 18
Žaludek Adam Conceptualization Methodology Writing – review & editing 18 19
Romero Eva Conceptualization Writing – review & editing 8
Rodríguez Anna Writing – review & editing 1 2
Orrego Carola Conceptualization Methodology Writing – original draft Writing – review & editing 1 2 4
for the SAFEST consortium ¶
1 Avedis Donabedian Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain
2 Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
3 Netherlands Institute for Health Services Research (Nivel), Utrecht, The Netherlands
4 Department of Surgery, Northwestern Quality Improvement, Research & Education in Surgery, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, United States of America
5 Network for Research on Chronicity, Primary Care, and Health Promotion (RICAPPS), Barcelona, Spain
6 OptiMedis AG, Hamburg, Germany
7 Faculty of Management, Economics and Society, University of Witten/Herdecke, Witten, Germany
8 Spanish Anaesthesia and Reanimation Incident Reporting System (SENSAR), Alcorcon, Spain
9 NOVA National School of Public Health, Public Health Research Center, Comprehensive Health Research Center, CHRC, NOVA University Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal
10 Department of Epidemiology, Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal
11 Scientific Center for Quality of Healthcare (IQ healthcare), Radboud Institute for Health Sciences (RIHS), Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
12 Department of Operating Theatres, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
13 Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia
14 European Society of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care (ESAIC), Brussels, Belgium
15 European Hospital and Healthcare Federation, Brussels, Belgium
16 Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia
17 Department of Surgery, North Estonia Medical Centre, Tallinn, Estonia
18 Spojená Akreditační Komise–Czech accreditation commission, Prague, Czech Republic
19 Department of Public Health, Charles University, Third Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic
Sundqvist Ann-Sofie Editor
Örebro University Faculty of Medicine and Health: Orebro universitet Fakulteten for medicin och halsa, SWEDEN
Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

¶ The complete membership of the author group can be found in the Acknowledgments.

* E-mail: cvalli@fadq.org
13 6 2024
2024
19 6 e030415929 9 2023
3 5 2024
© 2024 Valli et al
2024
Valli et al
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.

Introduction

Adverse events in health care affect 8% to 12% of patients admitted to hospitals in the European Union (EU), with surgical adverse events being the most common types reported.

Aim

SAFEST project aims to enhance perioperative care quality and patient safety by establishing and implementing widely supported evidence-based perioperative patient safety practices to reduce surgical adverse events.

Methods

We will conduct a mixed-methods hybrid type III implementation study supporting the development and adoption of evidence-based practices through a Quality Improvement Learning Collaborative (QILC) in co-creation with stakeholders. The project will be conducted in 10 hospitals and related healthcare facilities of 5 European countries. We will assess the level of adherence to the standardised practices, as well as surgical complications incidence, patient-reported outcomes, contextual factors influencing the implementation of the patient safety practices, and sustainability. The project will consist of six components: 1) Development of patient safety standardised practices in perioperative care; 2) Guided self-evaluation of the standardised practices; 3) Identification of priorities and actions plans; 4) Implementation of a QILC strategy; 5) Evaluation of the strategy effectiveness; 6) Patient empowerment for patient safety. Sustainability of the project will be ensured by systematic assessment of sustainability factors and business plans. Towards the end of the project, a call for participation will be launched to allow other hospitals to conduct the self-evaluation of the standardized practices.

Discussion

The SAFEST project will promote patient safety standardized practices in the continuum of care for adult patients undergoing surgery. This project will result in a broad implementation of evidence-based practices for perioperative care, spanning from the care provided before hospital admission to post-operative recovery at home or outpatient facilities. Different implementation challenges will be faced in the application of the evidence-based practices, which will be mitigated by developing context-specific implementation strategies. Results will be disseminated in peer-reviewed publications and will be available in an online platform.

European Union under the Horizon Europe Research and Innovation Programme 101057825 This work was supported by the European Union under the Horizon Europe Research and Innovation Programme under the grant agreement n° 101057825. The funder had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. Data AvailabilityThe SAFEST project main data dictionaries and databases generated will be available on requests for uses related to research and quality improvement, and potentially for commercial exploitation, subject to approval by the consortium. Data availability and access is governed by the SAFEST Data Management Plan which is aligned with the EU Open Data Initiative and the FAIR Principles (34). Further details and information on how to access the data will be available from SAFEST project website (www.safestsurgery.eu).
Data Availability

The SAFEST project main data dictionaries and databases generated will be available on requests for uses related to research and quality improvement, and potentially for commercial exploitation, subject to approval by the consortium. Data availability and access is governed by the SAFEST Data Management Plan which is aligned with the EU Open Data Initiative and the FAIR Principles (34). Further details and information on how to access the data will be available from SAFEST project website (www.safestsurgery.eu).
==== Body
pmcBackground

Adverse events in health care affect between 8% and 12% of patients admitted to hospitals in the European Union (EU) [1] and are accountable for approximately 21 billion Euros in direct costs [2]. An adverse event can be defined as ‘an unintended injury or complication caused by healthcare management and not by the patients’ underlying disease’ [3]; adverse events cause potentially preventable patient harm, lengthen hospital stays, and increase healthcare costs [3]. Surgical-related adverse events are one of the most common adverse events reported [4], with surgery and intensive care showing the highest pooled prevalence of preventable patient harm [5]. A more recent retrospective cohort study showed that in a random sample of 2809 hospital admissions, 23,6% suffered of at least one adverse event of which 30,4% were related to surgical or other procedural events [6].

Adopting evidence-based practices can enhance the quality of care delivered to the patients and thus significantly improve the overall safety outcomes of surgical care [7; 8]. A retrospective cohort study including 25,513 adult patients undergoing non-day care surgery in a tertiary university hospital in The Netherlands, concluded that guideline adherence to evidence-based practices was strongly associated with a reduced mortality rate [9]. However, translating evidence into practice is slow in the healthcare field; in fact, research indicates that it can take up to 17 years for evidence-based practices to be implemented, if implemented at all [10]. Common barriers to the implementation of evidence-based practices in clinical practice include: 1) front-line professionals do not know or do not trust the intervention effectiveness 2) evidence-based practices have been designed or implemented without consideration of patients’ needs and preferences 3) implementation context is not considered 4) non-effective implementation strategies or 5) health-professionals do not have the appropriate support from managers and decision-makers [11]. Therefore, having a set of patient-centred, evidence-based, practices with a high level of consensus and a comprehensive tailored implementation strategy considering contextual factors at macro-, meso- and micro-levels, is a cornerstone to ensure access to safe, innovative, sustainable, and high-quality surgical care [12].

Several studies have shown that most surgical errors (between 53 to 70%) occur outside the operating room, before and after surgery [3]. Thus, to optimise surgical safety, there is a need for a shift towards an approach focusing on the entire surgical pathway, including pre- and post-surgery [13]. This also includes care provided outside the hospital, for example optimisation of co-morbidities management in the primary care setting before surgery and pain medications prescribed after surgery.

Following the above-mentioned, multidisciplinary teams—including public health researchers, experts on patient safety and perioperative care, evaluators, clinicians, economic analysts, scientists, patients’ representatives, and policy advisors from seven European countries—developed the SAFEST project (https://www.safestsurgery.eu/).

Objectives

The SAFEST project, that will be conducted from June 2022 to June 2026, aims to improve and harmonise perioperative quality of care and patient safety by reducing surgical adverse events through the establishment and implementation of widely supported perioperative patient-centred standardised practices.

We also aim to increase the adherence to patients’ safety practices by identifying contextual factors (at macro-, meso- and micro-levels) that inhibit or promote the adoption, implementation, and sustainment of evidence-based patient safety practices. This information may be used to develop recommendations on the implementation of the standards in hospitals in various contexts across Europe to reduce knowledge-practice gaps.

Methods

Setting

SAFEST project will focus on the adult perioperative journey, including the following phases: pre-operative outside the hospital; pre-operative in the hospital; intra-operative in the hospital; post-operative in the hospital and post-operative outside the hospital (Fig 1).

10.1371/journal.pone.0304159.g001 Fig 1 Perioperative patient journey.

The project will be carried out in 10 hospitals and related healthcare facilities from 5 European Countries (Czech Republic, Estonia, Portugal, Spain, and The Netherlands). At the end of the project, a call for participation will be open to any interested hospitals in the EU and beyond.

Design

The SAFEST study is a mixed-methods hybrid type III implementation study [14] supporting the development and implementation of evidence-based patient safety practices through a Quality Improvement Learning Collaborative (QILC) strategy and combining qualitative and quantitative evidence through a convergent segregated approach [15]. The QILC will adopt a participatory design involving multidisciplinary teams of patients and clinical care providers per participating hospital and related healthcare facility, including surgeons, anaesthesiologists, nurses, quality experts, IT representatives and primary care providers among others. The QILC teams from various hospitals will gather for learning sessions to share and adopt best practices towards a common improvement goal.

Guiding frameworks

The overall study design will be underpinned by the Implementation Research Logic Model (IRLM), which will support the implementation of the project by ensuring scientific rigour, reproducibility and testable causal pathways [16]. Fig 2shows how the IRLM will be applied within the SAFEST project and their elements. IRLM identifies a set of determinants from different domains of the updated Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research (CFIR) that can impact the implementation process, the mechanisms, and outcomes [17]. Additionally, an integrated sustainability framework will be developed by expanding the CFIR [17] to include sustainability determinants to guide the sustainable implementation of project intervention.

10.1371/journal.pone.0304159.g002 Fig 2 IRLM applied within the SAFEST project.

Evidence-based patient safety practices

The evidence-based patient safety practices in SAFEST will include structural and process practices to promote patient safety and prevent the occurrence of adverse events and complications to be implemented throughout the continuum of perioperative care. The practices will be based on the highest level of available evidence indicating a positive impact on patient safety outcomes. These practices will be selected with patients and with relevant stakeholders including clinicians, hospital management, and national level policy makers.

Implementation strategies

The Quality Improvement Learning Collaborative (QILC)–will serve as the main implementation strategy of the standardised practices. Within the QILC multidisciplinary teams from multiple hospitals come together in learning sessions to share and learn best practices to make improvements around a common goal. Based on previous studies [18; 19], we hypothesise that by implementing the standardised practices within a QILC, adherence to standardised patient safety practices in perioperative care will improve by 15% and the frequency of surgical complications will decrease by 8% after 18 months of its implementation. The QILC will promote learning exchanges on improvement efforts and care provider teams will be guided to conduct rapid-cycle quality improvement projects. Teams will meet quarterly for didactive sessions on implementation strategies and to exchange lessons learnt. QILCs have shown to produce significant improvements in targeted clinical processes and outcomes, including patient safety [20].

Ethics

SAFEST project coordinator (Avedis Donabedian Research Institute) applied for ethical approval for the overall project to the local Clinical Research Ethics Committee (Comitè Ètic d’Investigació Clínica de l’IDIAP Jordi Gol) and it was granted on the 26th of July 2022 (22/146-P). In addition, each participating hospital from the five countries applied and obtain the ethical approval from their local authorities: from the Ethics Committee of the Centro Hospitalar e Universitario de Lisboa Central (1321/2022) and the Ethics Committee of the Centro Hospitalar e Universitário São João (20/2023) for Portugal; from the Clinical Research Ethics Committee (CEIM) of the Hospital Universitario y Politécnico La Fe (2022-815-1) and the Hospital Universitario Fundacion Alcorcon (22/107) for Spain; from the Ethics Committee of the Central Military Hospital Prague (108/18-45/2023) and the Opinion of the Ethics Committee on Clinical trial on Human Medicinal Products of Hořovice Hospital (066–2023) for Czech Republic; from the Human Research Ethics Committee of the University of Tartu for both Estonian hospitals: Tartu Hospital and of North Estonia Hospital (373/T-8); and, from the Medical Ethical Committee for Martini Hospital (2022–103) in the Netherlands. The Radboudumc university medical center in The Netherlands did not apply for the ethical approval as according to the local Research Ethics Committee, a full ethical review was not required (2022–15897).

Outcomes

Underpinned by the Donabedian framework to evaluate quality in healthcare [21], we will include measures to evaluate patient safety practices adherence, clinical effectiveness, patients’ perspectives, and the implementation process:

PRIMARY OUTCOME

Research question: How effectively are patient safety practices being adhered to in perioperative care?

Patient safety practices adherence will be assessed using data from electronic health records. These practices will be selected based on insights that will be gathered from self-evaluations and meetings with participating hospitals, focusing on areas with significant potential for improvement.”

SECONDARY OUTCOMES MEASURES

Research question: What is the impact of adherence to patient safety practices on clinical effectiveness?

Clinical effectiveness will include 30-day in-hospital surgical complications incidence and severity—following elective inpatient surgery—using the ISOS tool developed by the International Surgical Outcomes.

Research question: How do patients perceive the safety and quality of their surgical care?

Patients’ perspectives will include Patient Reported Measures (PROMs) and Patient Reported Experience Measures (PREMs).

Research question: What are the key implementation process outcomes and how do these factors influence the successful implementation of standardized practices in surgical settings?

The implementation process outcomes will include variables as acceptability, appropriateness, feasibility, implementation costs, adoptions, intervention fidelity and sustainability [22].

Project procedures

The project will consist of 6 main components: 1) Development of the patient safety standardised practices, 2) Guided self-evaluation of the SAFEST standardised practices in ten hospitals across five countries and beyond, 3) Identification of priorities and actions plans, 4) Setting up of the Quality Improvement Learning Collaborative (QILC), 5) Evaluation of the strategy effectiveness and monitoring for patient safety improvement and 6) Patient empowerment for patient safety. Fig 3represents SAFEST overall approach and project’s results.

10.1371/journal.pone.0304159.g003 Fig 3 SAFEST overall approach and project’s results.

1. Development of the patient safety standardised practices

The objective of this component is to develop and reach consensus on the set of evidence-based standardised practices. It will consist of five steps:

1.1 Development of the initial list of standardised practices

We will conduct a systematic review to identify clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) for safety in the perioperative care process in adult patients and classify the included recommendations according to the strength and level of evidence, and CPGs quality using the AGREE II tool [23]. A protocol specifying inclusion criteria, data extraction and data analysis methods has been developed and registered in PROSPERO [24].

1.2 Recruitment of multidisciplinary expert groups

We will recruit two multidisciplinary expert groups through purposive sampling: 1) a Scientific Advisory Group (SAG) and, 2) a Scientific Executive Group (SEG) of experts. These two groups will be involved throughout the patient safety practices development to provide inputs and feedback based on their expertise. They will be composed by multidisciplinary experts and relevant stakeholders including, patient representatives, perioperative scientific societies representatives, patient safety experts, medical industry members, national and international healthcare authorities, other related stakeholders, and partners organisation.

1.3 Delphi survey (two rounds) with multidisciplinary expert groups and patients

We will then produce a first draft of existing standardised practices that will be evaluated by the SAG through a modified Delphi technique consisting of a two-round online survey. SAG members will rate a) the importance and b) the feasibility of implementation of each practice using a 9-points Likert scale (1 being the least and 9 being the most important).

1.4 European surgical patient safety conference

Based on the feedback from the two-round Delphi survey we will refine the list and then present it for discussion in an in-person conference with a selection of SEG and SAG members balanced terms of gender, country and area of expertise.

1.5 Development of the final list of the standardised practices

Through an iterative approach, we will refine the list of the SAFEST standardised practices considering the feedback from the guided self-evaluation and the quality improvement learning collaborative of the 10 participating hospitals in Czech Republic, Estonia, Portugal, Spain, and The Netherlands (after component 2).

2. Guided self-evaluation of the SAFEST standardised practices in ten hospitals across five countries and beyond

The guided self-evaluation has the objective of evaluating the degree of implementation of the SAFEST standardised practices in ten hospitals at the time of evaluation. It will consist of four steps:

2.1 Development and testing of an online platform with a self-evaluation tool

We will develop an online platform incorporating a tool that will contain a scoring system to assess the degree of implementation of the SAFEST standardised practices resulting from 1.4 European surgical patient safety conference. The tool will be tested and then translated into the five main languages in participating hospitals (Czech, Dutch, Estonian, Portuguese, and Spanish). The platform will also include a forum/help desk feature through which participating hospitals can ask for help/assistance with the self-evaluation tool. Additionally, the platform will embed other relevant sections to collect hospitals data to evaluate on the adherence to the standardised practices and patients related surgical complications see components 5.2 and 5.3 of the Project procedures).

2.2 Development of educational and training material

We will develop educational and training materials including e a handbook providing instructions on how to use the online tool to conduct the self-evaluation. We will organise online training activities and webinars in addition to an in-person webinar in one participating hospital to present and explain the tool to the participating hospitals.

2.3 Hospital guided self-evaluation

The hospitals will adopt the tool and conduct a self-evaluation. We will analyse the collected data and report individualised results back to each hospital using the online platform.

2.4 Open survey (self-evaluation of standards) of EU-27 hospitals and beyond

At the end of the project, we will launch a call for participation to extend the self-evaluation of the SAFEST standardised practices in more hospitals from the 27 EU Member States and potentially outside the EU. Incentive to participate is to receive individualised benchmark reports based on the collected data and access to the materials toolbox. The results of this survey will be used to evaluate a potential scale-up of the standards implementation across Europe.

3. Identification of priorities and actions plans

This component aims to develop action plans for implementation of the standardised patient safety practices in the ten participating hospitals. It will consist of four steps:

3.1 Systematic review of reviews on interventions improving patient safety

We will conduct an umbrella review of effective evidence-based interventions to improve patient safety in the perioperative care process (including pre- and post-operative outpatient care in adult patients). A protocol specifying inclusion criteria, data extraction and data analysis methods has been developed and registered in PROSPERO [25].

3.2 Prioritisation process

We will then conduct webinars and interviews with hospital representatives, to discuss and identify priority improvement areas at hospital and country level based on the results of the previous performed self-evaluation. These representatives will also form the teams responsible for actual implementation of the patient safety practices (see also component 4).

3.3 Driver diagram and barrier analysis

We will analyse the data from the interviews, using a thematic analysis and summarising the main results of the prioritisation processes at the European level. Based on the results, we will develop a driver diagram indicating which factors need to be influenced to address the selected improvement priorities at the hospital level. A barrier analysis will be performed to get a full picture of barriers that may hinder implementation and factors that may facilitate implementation of the improvement priorities selected. Facilitators and barriers will be analysed and categorised using CFIR framework [17].

3.4 Action plans and toolbox development

We will develop and outline action plans at hospital’s level. We will provide support, for example through meetings and/or coaching sessions, for hospitals in (further) developing action plans based on improvement priorities, driver diagrams and identified barriers and facilitators, including formulation of improvement aims, interventions, working mechanisms, implementation strategies and evaluations (improvement cycle). Finally, we will develop a toolbox, including prioritisation instruction materials, tools for driver diagrams, barrier questionnaire and reporting tools, action plan formats, list of effective interventions and summary of results of the prioritisation process. This toolbox will be updated and refined during the Quality Improvement Learning Collaborative (see below).

4. Setting up of the quality improvement learning collaborative (QILC)

The QILC–implementation strategy of the SAFEST study- will work closely with the previous component (Identification of priorities and actions plans) and it consist of four steps:

4.1 Identify members of quality improvement learning collaborative teams in each country

We will form multi-professional implementation teams including patient representatives, and hospital personnel for each of the participating hospitals (ten teams in total).

4.2 Toolbox dissemination and refinement

We will disseminate to the implementation teams the refined and updated toolbox that was developed under component 3.4, including educational materials and instructions on how to apply it through the online platform. Through an iterative approach we will refine the toolbox during the implementation based on newly identified needs by the hospital implementation teams, hospital staff and patients.

4.3 Facilitate learning and exchange to promote SAFEST standardised practices implementation

Based on the action planning, the assessment of organisational needs and barriers (component 3) and evaluation of patient needs (component 6), we will develop a training curriculum for the hospital implementation teams to support the implementation of SAFEST standardised practices. The curriculum will include a series of activities, namely: six quarterly meetings for implementation teams consisting of didactic sections (e.g., on leadership engagement) and exchanges of experiences, tools, tips, and tricks; identification of external experts who will serve as quality improvement coaches; and bimonthly coaching sessions for the hospital implementation teams.

4.4 Contextual factors evaluation

We will develop data collection materials to measure implementation determinants, strategies, implementation outcomes, including sustainability and costs, based on the Implementation Research Logic Model (IRLM) [16] using the different domains of the CFIR [17]. We will collect qualitative data from the hospital implementation teams through group interviews and quantitative data from the hospital implementation teams through an online survey. We will then conduct thematic analysis of the interview transcripts, and we will narratively synthesise survey’s results. Data analyses will focus on how contextual factors serve as barriers and drivers to implementation and on the importance of the QILC in combination with other implementation strategies employed at the 10 hospitals. Finally, we will provide feedback to hospital implementation teams on their implementation process.

5. Evaluation of the strategy effectiveness and monitoring for patient safety improvement

As part of the evaluation strategy, we will assess clinical effectiveness and implementation of the SAFEST standardised practices. This component will consist of five steps:

5.1 Development of a core outcomes set for patient safety in perioperative care

We will conduct an umbrella review to identify outcomes utilised to assess patient safety in perioperative care. A protocol specifying inclusion criteria, data extraction and data analysis methods has been developed and registered in PROSPERO [26]. The outcomes identified in the literature will then be prioritised through a two-round Delphi and stakeholder consensus. The results of the consensus process will inform the final core outcomes set (COS) for patient safety in perioperative care. A protocol detailing the COS development has been registered in COMET [27].

5.2 Definition and preparation of evaluation procedures and guidelines at hospital level

We will develop an evidence map of existing data and format across participating hospitals as well as cost-related data. Following this assessment, we will conduct a systematic retrospective record review of the health records at the patient level from the participating hospitals to assess a) adherence to the standardised practices and b) surgical complications measured with the ISOS tool developed by the International Surgical Outcomes Study [28]. Health records review will take place between June 2023 and November 2025.

5.3 Evaluate effectiveness of QILC intervention strategy

We will design an interrupted time series to estimate effects of the intervention on the adherence to the SAFEST standardized practices and the occurrence of surgical complications. This data will be collected into the SAFEST online platform (see component 2.1 of the Project procedures).

5.4 Monitor improvements through evaluation of locally collected process and clinical data, patients’ reported outcomes (PROMs) and patient reported experience measure (PREMs)

Each hospital will also be able to collect process and clinical data at the hospital level into the SAFEST platform to calculate measures as required from the COS developed as part of step 5.1. The platform will facilitate its analysis and visualisation through which we can monitor the implementation and provide feedback to the hospitals.

We will also utilise validated PROMs and PREMs questionnaires from the literature. Preference will be given to measures that have already been validated in the participating countries. The PROMs and PREMs questionnaires will be uploaded into a mobile app and integrated into the SAFEST platform. PREMs will be collected only after discharge, while PROMs before and after surgery. Patients will be invited to participate and report their PROMs and PREMs through the app. Authors will not have access to patient’s identity during or after the study.

5.5 Final assessment including triangulation of quantitative and qualitative data

We will triangulate quantitative and qualitative data to assess the impact of the SAFEST strategy through a convergent segregated approach [15], including comparison between hospitals. We will conduct a sequential analysis of the quantitative and qualitative components of the data. We will analyse each dataset separately and then, draw meta-inferences informed by the findings from both data sets.

6. Patient empowerment for patient safety

Throughout the entire span of the project, we aim to include the patient’s perspective in every activity undertaken. To ensure this, the following three steps will be taken:

6.1 Engagement of patient expert groups

Patients will be included as patient safety partners throughout the project, including in the co-design of the standardised practices, selection of priorities at local level, and development of evaluation measures. We will recruit a patient-researcher as a consortium team member to pro-actively conduct research activities. Patients and the patient researcher will constitute an expert group to oversee project activities and to participate in standards development, the Delphi survey, and meetings. Further, the expert group will review the main materials and deliverables, ensuring that patient perspectives, gender issues and other elements regarding inequalities are incorporated across the project. Within SAFEST, co-production is expected to support patient-centred implementation of the intervention, patient satisfaction, and innovation [29].

6.2 Identification of patients’ needs

Prior to implementation of the standards, researchers at country-level will conduct qualitative interviews with 12 purposefully selected adult patients in each of the ten hospitals (up to 120 patients in total) to identify patient needs, expectations, and priorities at the hospital and country level. We will develop recruitment material and strategies ensuring broad representation, including vulnerable populations. Patients will be recruited between September 2023 and December 2023. Based on the interviews and literature we will develop a patient journey map on the perioperative process in the hospitals. The journey maps and descriptions of interview results will be used to select strategies and actions for the implementation toolbox.

6.3 Develop recommendations and tools for patient empowerment for patient safety

We will develop recommendations and tools for empowerment of patients in the field of patient safety together with the patient-researcher and patient expert group. These tools will be developed as a result of the implementation component and may include a variety of supporting material, e.g., information on questions they could ask during pre- and post-operative consultations, a lay language informational video and project summary in collaboration with patient expert groups.

Sustainability

Targeted actions will be embedded within the implementation process to promote sustainment of project impact beyond the duration of the SAFEST study. We will develop an integrated sustainability framework to guide the sustainable implementation of the QILC. This will be achieved by first conducting a literature scan to identify sustainability theories, models, and frameworks; extracting and standardizing the set of sustainability constructs; compiling and mapping final sustainability constructs onto the CFIR. This updated framework will serve as a common point of reference to guide interviews with key experts on sustainability factors and, eventually, more sustainable implementation of quality improvement activities. We will further conduct a time-driven activity-based costing exercise for the QILC implementation at participating hospitals to estimate the resources and time required for routine implementation of the developed tools when scaling up to a larger number of hospitals. Activity-based costing is an innovative approach towards measuring costs across an entire care episode whereby costs are estimated using the quantity of time and the cost per unit of each resource used [30]. This bottom-up approach to costings follows the actual care processes and contrasts with traditional costing approaches where cost estimates may be inaccurate. We will conduct activity-based costing for 3 perioperative care pathways focused on in this project. Using the patient journey maps produced, we will identify common touchpoints with the healthcare systems and compare the pre- and post- intervention costs for the 3 perioperative pathways. Results of this costing exercise will inform the business case development where costs are presented alongside the evaluation of intervention effectiveness and patient reported outcomes. Additionally, the information acquired from the costing exercise it will be used in drawing up business plans in our strategy to scale up implementation. In terms of environmental sustainability, we will draw on existing standards developed in partnership with HealthCareWithoutHarm [31], which addresses generic action areas to improve environmental sustainability of hospitals. These generic standards will be supplemented by specific perioperative-care standards, aligned with the activities implemented as part of the bundle [32, 33].

Discussion

Contribution

The SAFEST project represents a significant advancement in the dissemination and implementation of patient safety standardized practices within the continuum of care for adult patients undergoing surgery. By focusing on this critical area of healthcare, our study emphasizes the importance of patient safety across the entire surgical journey, from preoperative preparation to postoperative care.

Moreover, the SAFEST project stands out for its commitment to patient-centered care through the involvement of patient representatives throughout the project. Our study ensures that the perspectives and preferences of those directly impacted by surgical care are central to our efforts by actively involving patient representatives throughout the project.

Furthermore, the SAFEST project’s emphasis on context-specific implementation strategies underscores its contribution to advancing the field of implementation science. Through the identification of contextual factors at micro, macro, and meso levels within each hospital setting, we will tailor our implementation strategies to address the specific challenges and opportunities present in each context. This approach not only increases the likelihood of successful implementation but also enhances the sustainability and scalability of patient safety practices in surgical care settings.

In summary, by enhancing dissemination and implementation efforts for patient safety standardized practices in the continuum of care for adult surgical patients, the SAFEST project makes a significant contribution to improving healthcare quality and patient outcomes. Through its patient-centered approach, tailored implementation strategies, and engagement with diverse stakeholders, our study is well-positioned to drive meaningful advancements in patient safety and quality improvement initiatives.

Strengths and limitations

Strengths

We will develop a list of patient-centred evidence-based standardised practices following an iterative mixed-methods Delphi consensus-building approach involving a wide range of stakeholders.

This project will result in a broad European implementation of evidence-based practices for perioperative care, spanning from the care provided before hospital admission to post-operative recovery at home or outpatient facilities.

We will develop an interactive platform to support the adoption of the evidence-based standardised practices. The platform will be open to any hospital interested in participating.

The perspective of patients will be actively included in every step of the project.

We will conduct a comprehensive analysis of barriers and facilitators associated with the implementation process and sustainability of implementation.

Limitations

There will be variability in interpreting how to implement and assess the level of adherence of the evidence-based practices; specific implementation and evaluation manuals will be developed to favour a similar understanding across participating hospitals.

Various implementation challenges are anticipated in the application of the evidence-based practices, including potential resource constraints unique to each participating health facility. These challenges will be mitigated by developing context-specific implementation strategies.

The study operates within a defined timeframe, limiting the ability to capture long-term outcomes and trends. Nevertheless, we’ve strategically allocated resources to ensure that the impact of our project extends well beyond the immediate study duration.

Dissemination of the results

The project’s results will be disseminated in a tailored multi-pronged approach, including the creation of an interactive platform. The data generated by the project will be managed following the Golden Open access to maximise the impacts of the project’s research outputs.

The results will be disseminated and exploited based on a Dissemination, Exploitation and Communication Plan (DECP) elaborated by the SAFEST Consortium to ensure that the project results will create impact in the long run and that will be used by relevant stakeholders. The DECP will benefit the project by increasing the visibility of the research as well as enhance project’s reputation and pave the way for further collaboration and policy change.

We would like to thank all the members of the SAFEST Consortium for their valuable assistance in developing this protocol: María del Mar Fernandez, Marieke Voshaar, Pedro Casaca-Carvalho, Patrícia Sousa-Paulo, Ana Beatriz Nunes, Víctor Soria, Yolanda Sanduende, Neus Fábregas, Ismael Martínez, Irene León, Ashish Bartakke, Javier Silva García, Joel Starkopf, Janne Kommusaar, Janne Pühvel, Mari Kangasniemi, Sofía Carbonell, Marie Nabbe, Maria Wittmann, Arta Leci, Julia Dowel, Alex Rawlings, Raffaella Donadio, Sylvia Daamen, Frantisek Vlcek, Sandro Zamarian,.

We also would like to thank the health professionals from the 10 participating hospitals for their involvement: Marion van der Kolk, Jan Hofland, Sjoukje de Vet-Kersten (Radboud university medical center); Henriëtte Smid-Nanninga, Hans de Boer (Martini Hospital); Nuno Diogo; Maria José Maia (Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Central (CHULC, EPE)); Ana Azevedo, Sara Rodrigues, Elsa Guimarães, Ricardo São Simão, Fernanda Bastos (Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João (CHUSJ, EPE)), Paula Pérez, Laura Bruno, Mónica Millan Scheiding, Mª Jose Felip, Marisa Correcher Palau, Celia Lucas Jiménez, Ángel Garay, Diego Moreno, Carmen Reina Diaz-Crespo, EmilioPérez, Carlos Rabadan Sanz, Susana Gómez Leiba (Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La Fe), Rodrígo Molina, Laura Vidaurreta, Cristina Garmendia, Antonio Bartolome, Laura Vega, Isabel Sastre, Susana Lorenzo, Ana Belén Díaz, Inés de la Fuente, Alicia González Davila, Covadonga del Pozo (Hospital Universitario Fundación Alcorcón), Liis Jaanimäe, Maret Laheveer, Ilona Pastarus, Juri Karjagin, Kaie Stroo, Joel Starkpof (Tartu University Hospital), Olav Tammik, Kristina Lillemets (North Estonia Medical Centre), Helena McMenamin, Lucie Kubátová, Michal Ondica, Lenka Gutová, Jan Frühauf, Michaela Kalinová (Military University Hospital Prague), Blanka Hošková, Martina Landová (Hořovice Hospital).

Abbreviations

CPGs Clinical Practice Guidelines

EU European Union

EUR Euro

IRLM Implementation Research Logic Mode

QILC Quality Improvement Learning Collaborative

PROMs Patients’ reported outcomes

PREMs Patient reported experience measur

10.1371/journal.pone.0304159.r001
Decision Letter 0
Sundqvist Ann-Sofie Academic Editor
© 2024 Ann-Sofie Sundqvist
2024
Ann-Sofie Sundqvist
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
Submission Version0
27 Feb 2024

PONE-D-23-31626Improving quality and patient safety in surgical care through standardisation and harmonisation of perioperative care (SAFEST project): a research protocol for a mixed methods study.PLOS ONE

Dear Dr. Valli,

Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.

==============================

As you can se there is a descripancy between the reviews (reviewer 1: minor revisions; reviewer 2: major revision). In order to meet PLOS ONE's required publication standard you need to revise the manuscript in concordance with their comments.

Looking forward seeing your revised manuscript.​

==============================

Please submit your revised manuscript by Apr 10 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.

Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:

A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.

A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.

An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.

If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.

We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.

Kind regards,

Ann-Sofie Sundqvist, Ass. Prof.

Academic Editor

PLOS ONE

Journal requirements:

When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.

1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure:"This work was supported by the European Union under the Horizon Europe Research and Innovation Programme under the grant agreement nº 101057825."

Please state what role the funders took in the study.  If the funders had no role, please state: ""The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."" 

If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed. 

Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.

3. Please expand the acronym “EU” (as indicated in your financial disclosure) so that it states the name of your funders in full.

This information should be included in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.

4. Please provide a complete Data Availability Statement in the submission form, ensuring you include all necessary access information or a reason for why you are unable to make your data freely accessible. If your research concerns only data provided within your submission, please write "All data are in the manuscript and/or supporting information files" as your Data Availability Statement.

[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]

Reviewers' comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Does the manuscript provide a valid rationale for the proposed study, with clearly identified and justified research questions?

The research question outlined is expected to address a valid academic problem or topic and contribute to the base of knowledge in the field.

Reviewer #1: Yes

Reviewer #2: Yes

**********

2. Is the protocol technically sound and planned in a manner that will lead to a meaningful outcome and allow testing the stated hypotheses?

The manuscript should describe the methods in sufficient detail to prevent undisclosed flexibility in the experimental procedure or analysis pipeline, including sufficient outcome-neutral conditions (e.g. necessary controls, absence of floor or ceiling effects) to test the proposed hypotheses and a statistical power analysis where applicable. As there may be aspects of the methodology and analysis which can only be refined once the work is undertaken, authors should outline potential assumptions and explicitly describe what aspects of the proposed analyses, if any, are exploratory.

Reviewer #1: Yes

Reviewer #2: Partly

**********

3. Is the methodology feasible and described in sufficient detail to allow the work to be replicable?

Descriptions of methods and materials in the protocol should be reported in sufficient detail for another researcher to reproduce all experiments and analyses. The protocol should describe the appropriate controls, sample size calculations, and replication needed to ensure that the data are robust and reproducible.

Reviewer #1: Yes

Reviewer #2: Yes

**********

4. Have the authors described where all data underlying the findings will be made available when the study is complete?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception, at the time of publication. The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.

Reviewer #1: Yes

Reviewer #2: Yes

**********

5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?

PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.

Reviewer #1: Yes

Reviewer #2: Yes

**********

6. Review Comments to the Author

Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above and, if applicable, provide comments about issues authors must address before this protocol can be accepted for publication. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about research or publication ethics.

You may also provide optional suggestions and comments to authors that they might find helpful in planning their study.

(Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)

Reviewer #1: This protocol describes a mixed-methods hybrid type III implementation study designed to support the development and adoption of evidence-based practices in order to improve perioperative patient safety. The study will be conducted in 10 hospitals of 5 European countries. Implementation outcomes include 1)adherence to standardised practices, 2)sustainability 3) usability, and 4) validity. The study will also assess adverse outcomes following surgery.

The study protocol is well developed and the methodology adapted to the study purpose. The only point that should be clarified is the link between context analysis through the CIFER protocol and the specific intervention that will be implemented. The study protocol makes the assumptions that it will be a teaching program, but actually, the results of context analysis may suggest alternative strategies than teaching (i.e. computer program, change of the process of care, walk rounds etc…) This should be discussed in the protocol further. There is also an imprecision in the introduction with the citation of the study by “Van Klei WA, Hoff RG, Van Aarnhem EE, et al. Effects of the introduction of the WHO "Surgical Safety Checklist" on in-hospital mortality: a cohort study. Ann Surg 2012;255(1):44-9 , as a reference showing that guidelines decrease surgical mortality. The study by Aarnhem is about a checklist, not about a guideline. I would suggest another reference. The limitation section is a bit vague since obstacles of implementation studies are well known and deserve attention (i.e. ressources, training, duration ). This should be specified in the limitation section.

In conclusion, a nice protocol of a promising study that needs however additional details provided.

Reviewer #2: General comments to authors

Thank you for allowing me to review the protocol for this ambitious but important project funded by the EU – Horizon Europe Framework Programme.

Since this is a substantial project I understand that it is a challenge to describe this in a balanced way in a protocol. But the paper will benefit from being restructured and clarified which will make it easier for the reader to grasp the project, see comments below. I think the main problem with the structure is that you have three processes (phases) sometimes running in parallel, that is the intervention (with planning and developing), the implementation and the evaluation process, but I have written some suggestions for this.

Although guidelines do not solve the whole issue to create safe care, to me this is an important prerequisite with impact on other initiatives that has to be solved. From a context perspective the need is extensive as the surgical specialty is responsible for many patient injuries or adverse events. I am looking forward to see future results from this project.

Specific comments

Title

Improving quality and patient safety in surgical care through standardisation and

harmonisation of perioperative care (SAFEST project): a research protocol for a mixed

methods study.

The title includes both concepts patient safety and quality, but is not explained in the background why the reader get unsure how it is used in the different sections in the paper.

Abstract section

- Needs reformulation according to recommendations below.

Background

Page 3.

- The background is somewhat short but logic except from that some main concepts are missing (see further down) and there is no clear rationale (please add this).

- Is it quality of care or patient safety that is your main focus? Please clarify.

- Furthermore, your main concepts of quality of care or patient safety which also is your outcome measures are barely not mentioned nor defined in this section.

- In the first section important information about adverse events is described. However, there is no clear definition of one of your main concepts i.e. adverse event (AEs). I find it very important that you define and are clear with what AE and patient injuries means for this project.

Page 4.

- Your objective is to improve and harmonise perioperative patient safety, but what does this mean. The focus in the background section is on unsafe care, clarify what you mean by perioperative patient safety? What do you want to achieve, is it less numbers of AEs which is implied? What about outcomes on a patient level? This needs to be developed.

- Is it quality of care or patient safety or both that is your main focus? Please clarify.

- One of the most important measures to achieve patient safety (safe care) in complex systems is to adopt a system perspective. According to me you are adopting a system perspective (system safety) in this project, which is very good. But the paper would benefit from a clearer description of this standpoint.

- In the last section you write multidisciplinary teams – including experts on patient safety and perioperative care. However, this is the only place in your paper where they are mentioned. Since patient safety is your overarching objective, I find it very important that they will be included during the whole process.

- Another concern is that you need to clarify what professions these multidisciplinary teams will consist of?

Objectives

- To clarify this project, it would benefit from identifying overarching research questions. Since you have three main outcomes (clinical effectiveness, patient´s perspectives and the process of implementation) in focus, this would be feasible.

Methods

Page 4. This study is a mixed-methods hybrid type III implementation study, the paper and project would benefit from a short explanation/motivation of why and by adding a reference to this. For example, Landes et al. (2019) https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6779135/

- You also write that you will use mixed methods to collect data, add reference to this, for example Creswell & Plano-Clark. I also recommend you describe which design (convergent parallel design or what?), see recommended reference.

- You describe both design and data collection under the design heading. For a clear structure I recommend you to use the sub-headings design, setting (and sample) and data collection.

- Page 4. Quality Improvement Learning Collaborative (QILC) needs to be described and clarified early in the paper. As it is now, this is described at page 5.

- Good that you use Implementation Research Logic Model (IRLM) and CFIR as it clarifies and add to the written text. The paper would benefit from a sub-heading that e.g. says “guiding frameworks”.

- You write; The evidence-based patient safety practices in SAFEST will include structural and process practices to promote patient safety and prevent the occurrence of adverse events and complications to be implemented throughout the continuum of perioperative care.

• Since you have clear project outcomes, and you are adding structure and process, the paper should benefit from adding the reference from your institute Donabedian, A. (2005), Evaluating the Quality of Medical Care. The Milbank Quarterly, 83: 691-729.

• Check this section for sighting error, can be misinterpreted.

• This section explains parts of my concerns described under the background section, please add and explain this in that section.

• Furthermore, above the concept of complications is used but not explained in the background section.

Page 5 (first section) you write that QILC will serve as the main implementation strategy of

the standardized practices. As it is now you mix both hypothesis and strategies, please structure it more clearly. Add a sub-heading for example implementation strategies, and it will become clearer. What other strategies will you use (facilitation, training and/or support) and if, what does it include (content, activities, dose and delivery)?

Setting

Page 5. Under this section you describe that it is the adult perioperative journey with its phases and in or outside the hospital. The paper would benefit from a short description to all readers of what pre, per and post actually means.

Page 5. You write that; the project will be implemented in 10 hospitals from 5 European Countries. But as you focus on the whole patient journey that is inside and outside the hospital there is a need for a further explanation.

Outcomes

Page 5. You write that you will use a composite indicator based on the main priorities established by the participating hospitals. Please explain this briefly.

Described variables to measure implementation outcomes are you really going to use all 7 variables by Proctor? I think intervention fidelity (with its potential moderators) would be enough to evaluate the primary outcome measure adherence to patient safety practices. Rethink and clarify this.

Project procedures

Component 1.

Page 6. The project will consist of 6 main components, please add the six components in the text as it would clarify for the reader. But I can also see that there are different overarching phases which may help the reader to get structure i.e. development/design and planning phase, implementation phase and evaluation and reporting phase. Maybe these headings could help the reader to easily grasp the overarching structure of the work process.

Page 6. Figure 3 is very good to give structure to this project. Although a hybrid type 3 design, has its main focus on quality of care or patient safety implementation outcomes, it is confusing that the part with the development of the clinical intervention is presented after the Implementation Research Logic Model (IRLM) in the paper. It would benefit from describing the connection between figure 1 and 3, that is figure 3 (SAFEST overall approach) is the same as the block clinical intervention in figure 1 and if you could present it in a more logic way.

Page 6 _1.2 You will recruit multidisciplinary expert groups 1) a Scientific Advisory Group

(SAG) and, 2) a Scientific Executive Group (SEG) of experts. Further down in the paper you describe the composition of these groups, but patient safety experts are not mentioned here which I find a bit strange. It does not say on what system level, but patient safety experts from my experience exist even on macro level. Please clarify.

Furthermore component 1 seems clear and well thought out.

Component 2-3.

Page 7.

It seems to me that these components consist of both developing and preparing different tools, handbooks and action plans and an umbrella review together with concrete implementation strategies such as training and support which make this part a bit confusing. I recommend that you structure the section with project procedures in a table, see for example Seismann-Petersen et al. 2022: https://bmcnurs.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12912-022-00858-6

If you find the suggestion with a table for the more detailed information you could describe the workflow in the components more briefly.

Component 4

As far as I understand, this component is a prerequisite for component 3 why I suggest that this would benefit from more logically being presented before the actual actions that will take place in component 3.

Component 5.

Page 9, 5.1 You describe that you will develop a core outcomes set for patient safety in perioperative care. Is it patient safety or quality of care or both. These concepts are often intermingled in the literature, I just want to draw your attention to it.

Page 9, 5.2 You are going to review health records of the participating hospitals and/or collect additional data to assess a) adherence to the standardised practices and b) surgical complications measured with the ISO tool. What exactly do you mean by reviewing health records is it systematic retrospective record reviews and on what level of data (patient data), please clarify.

The complications in the ISOS tool, are you going to use them as markers to be reviewed, could be clarified? What is the focus in the ISOS tool on complications, patient injuries or adverse events, needs to be clear?

How will you collect data according to adherence to standardized practices?

Page 9, 5.4 You write, each hospital will also be able to collect process and clinical data into the SAFEST platform, but what kind of data?

Survey of PROMs and PREMs, are you also going to collect a baseline for these variables?

Page 10, 5.5 Again, you could add references and motivate triangulation of data and sequential analysis. Is it a convergent parallel design you aim to do (see comment under method section)?

Component 6

Very good that you also intend to involve patients which is very important for both implementation and safe care.

Consider adding references on co-production/co-creation as I would say you aim to do.

Sustainability

There is a great strength that you intend to consider sustainability which the same as patient involvement is very important to achieve a sustainable project over time.

Analysis

The paper is lacking a clear and logic description of the analytic approach as it is embedded in the six main components with its sub-components or is it activities? If you do not provide a table is it possible to clarify this by a short summary or maybe a table specific for this section?

Discussion

This section seems very short to me as there is no discussion about design, and what the study will provide and what gaps that are addressed and according to what needs and if and what this project could act as a model for, but I will leave this to the editor to decide.

Data sharing statement

How will you handle patient record data included in the record review?

**********

7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.

If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.

Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.

Reviewer #1: Yes: Prof Guy Haller

Reviewer #2: No

**********

[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.

10.1371/journal.pone.0304159.r002
Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
30 Apr 2024

Dear PLOS ONE Editorial Staff and Reviewers;

We would like to express our sincere gratitude for taking the time to review our manuscript titled “Improving quality and patient safety in surgical care through standardisation and harmonisation of perioperative care (SAFEST project): a research protocol for a mixed methods study”.

The reviewers’ insightful feedback and constructive comments have been invaluable in refining our work. In response to the reviewers’ suggestions and queries, we have prepared a detailed point-by-point response document named ‘Response to Reviewers’ (also copied and pasted below). Each point has been carefully considered, and we have provided explanations, clarifications, and revisions as appropriate.

We are confident that this input has strengthened the quality and clarity of our manuscript, and we greatly appreciate your dedication to improving the work in our field.

Thank you once again for your valuable contributions.

Reviewer #1

General comments

This protocol describes a mixed-methods hybrid type III implementation study designed to support the development and adoption of evidence-based practices in order to improve perioperative patient safety. The study will be conducted in 10 hospitals of 5 European countries. Implementation outcomes include 1)adherence to standardised practices, 2)sustainability 3) usability, and 4) validity. The study will also assess adverse outcomes following surgery. The study protocol is well developed and the methodology adapted to the study purpose.

Specific comments

Comment 1

The only point that should be clarified is the link between context analysis through the CIFER protocol and the specific intervention that will be implemented. The study protocol makes the assumptions that it will be a teaching program, but actually, the results of context analysis may suggest alternative strategies than teaching (i.e. computer program, change of the process of care, walk rounds etc…) This should be discussed in the protocol further.

Response to comment 1

The Collaborative will serve as the main implementation strategy (see ‘Implementation strategies’ subsection under ‘Methods’), but indeed, it is expected that multiple implementation strategies that can impact the implementation will be employed at the sites. We have clarified that we will analyse this in section ‘4.4 Contextual factors evaluation’ by adding the following text:

“Data analyses will focus on how contextual factors serve as barriers and drivers to implementation and on the importance of the QILC in combination with other implementation strategies employed at the 10 hospitals.”

Comment 2

There is also an imprecision in the introduction with the citation of the study by “Van Klei WA, Hoff RG, Van Aarnhem EE, et al. Effects of the introduction of the WHO "Surgical Safety Checklist" on in-hospital mortality: a cohort study. Ann Surg 2012;255(1):44-9 , as a reference showing that guidelines decrease surgical mortality. The study by Aarnhem is about a checklist, not about a guideline. I would suggest another reference.

Response to comment 2

Thanks for the observation. We have included two references which are more appropriate for the statement below.

“Adopting evidence-based practices can improve the quality of care delivered to the patients and thus significantly improve the overall safety outcomes of surgical care (Connor L 2023; Emond YEJJM 2022).”

New references:

1. Connor L, Dean J, McNett M, Tydings DM, Shrout A, Gorsuch PF, Hole A, Moore L, Brown R, Melnyk BM, Gallagher-Ford L. Evidence-based practice improves patient outcomes and healthcare system return on investment: Findings from a scoping review. Worldviews Evid Based Nurs. 2023 Feb;20(1):6-15. doi: 10.1111/wvn.12621. Epub 2023 Feb 8. PMID: 36751881.

2. Emond YEJJM, Calsbeek H, Peters YAS, Bloo GJA, Teerenstra S, Westert GP, Damen J, Wollersheim HC, Wolff AP. Increased adherence to perioperative safety guidelines associated with improved patient safety outcomes: a stepped-wedge, cluster-randomised multicentre trial. Br J Anaesth. 2022 Mar;128(3):562-573. doi: 10.1016/j.bja.2021.12.019. Epub 2022 Jan 15. PMID: 35039174.

Comment 3

The limitation section is a bit vague since obstacles of implementation studies are well known and deserve attention (i.e. resources, training, duration). This should be specified in the limitation section.

Response to comment 3

We appreciate the feedback regarding the limitation section of our study protocol, we edited the second bullet point and added a third limitation (last bullet point) as follows:

Limitations

· There will be variability in interpreting how to implement and assess the level of adherence of the evidence-based practices; specific implementation and evaluation manuals will be developed to favour a similar understanding across participating hospitals.

· Various implementation challenges are anticipated in the application of the evidence-based practices, including potential resource constraints unique to each participating health facility. These challenges will be mitigated by developing context-specific implementation strategies.

· The study operates within a defined timeframe, limiting the ability to capture long-term outcomes and trends. Nevertheless, we've strategically allocated resources to ensure that the impact of our project extends well beyond the immediate study duration.

Comment 4

In conclusion, a nice protocol of a promising study that needs however additional details provided.

Reviewer #2

General comments to authors

Thank you for allowing me to review the protocol for this ambitious but important project funded by the EU; Horizon Europe Framework Programme.

Since this is a substantial project I understand that it is a challenge to describe this in a balanced way in a protocol. But the paper will benefit from being restructured and clarified which will make it easier for the reader to grasp the project, see comments below. I think the main problem with the structure is that you have three processes (phases) sometimes running in parallel, that is the intervention (with planning and developing), the implementation and the evaluation process, but I have written some suggestions for this.

Although guidelines do not solve the whole issue to create safe care, to me this is an important prerequisite with impact on other initiatives that has to be solved. From a context perspective the need is extensive as the surgical specialty is responsible for many patient injuries or adverse events. I am looking forward to see future results from this project.

Specific comments

Comment 1

Title

Improving quality and patient safety in surgical care through standardisation and harmonisation of perioperative care (SAFEST project): a research protocol for a mixed methods study.

1. The title includes both concepts patient safety and quality but is not explained in the background why the reader get unsure how it is used in the different sections in the paper.

Response to comment 1

• We have now added the concept of quality into the Abstract and Background. In the Background we explained it as follows:

“Adopting evidence-based practices can enhance the quality of care delivered to the patients and thus significantly improve the overall safety outcomes of surgical care.”

Comment 2

Abstract section

2. Needs reformulation according to recommendations below.

Response to comment 2

• We edited the ‘Aim’ sub-section in the ‘Abstract’ as follows:

“SAFEST project aims to enhance perioperative care quality and patient safety by establishing and implementing widely supported evidence-based perioperative patient safety practices to reduce surgical adverse events.”

Comments 3-6

Background-Page 3.

3. The background is somewhat short but logic except from that some main concepts are missing (see further down) and there is no clear rationale (please add this).

4. Is it quality of care or patient safety that is your main focus? Please clarify.

5. Furthermore, your main concepts of quality of care or patient safety which also is your outcome measures are barely not mentioned nor defined in this section.

6. In the first section important information about adverse events is described. However, there is no clear definition of one of your main concepts i.e. adverse event (AEs). I find it very important that you define and are clear with what AE and patient injuries means for this project.

Responses to comments 3-6

• The main focus of this project is to improve patients’ safety throughout the surgical care pathway by enhancing the quality of care delivered through the implementation of evidence-based standardized practices. For this reason, the paper often uses the terms quality and safety together since by increasing the quality of care, patients’ safety will also improve. We edited the background section to better clarify these concepts. Additionally, we also define adverse events as suggested.

• Additionally, we edited the ‘Objectives’ section to better clarify the concept of quality of care in relation to patient safety.

Comments 7-11

Background-Page 4

7. Your objective is to improve and harmonise perioperative patient safety, but what does this mean. The focus in the background section is on unsafe care, clarify what you mean by perioperative patient safety? What do you want to achieve, is it less numbers of AEs which is implied? What about outcomes on a patient level? This needs to be developed.

8. Is it quality of care or patient safety or both that is your main focus? Please clarify.

9. One of the most important measures to achieve patient safety (safe care) in complex systems is to adopt a system perspective. According to me you are adopting a system perspective (system safety) in this project, which is very good. But the paper would benefit from a clearer description of this standpoint.

10. In the last section you write multidisciplinary teams; including experts on patient safety and perioperative care. However, this is the only place in your paper where they are mentioned. Since patient safety is your overarching objective, I find it very important that they will be included during the whole process.

11. Another concern is that you need to clarify what professions these multidisciplinary teams will consist of?

Response to comment 7

• To better clarify the project’s main objective, we edited as follows:

The SAFEST project, that will be conducted from June 2022 to June 2026, aims to improve and harmonise perioperative quality of care and patient safety by reducing surgical adverse events through the establishment and implementation of widely supported perioperative patient-centred standardised practices.

Response to comment 8

• As described above, the main focus of this project is to improve patients’ safety throughout the surgical care pathway by enhancing the quality of care delivered through the implementation of evidence-based standardized practices. For this reason, the paper often uses the terms quality and safety together as by increasing the quality of care, patients’ safety will also improve. We edited the ‘Background’ and ‘Objectives’ sections to better clarify these concepts.

Responses to comment 9

• As correctly mentioned by the reviewer, in order to increase the adherence to patients' safety practices, a system perspective is essential. For this reason, we will identify and analyse contextual factors (at macro-, meso- and micro-levels) that inhibit or promote the adoption, implementation, and sustainment of evidence-based patient safety practices for each hospital and related healthcare facility. This information will be used to develop recommendations on the implementation of the standards in hospitals in various contexts across Europe to reduce knowledge-practice gaps. Such rationale is explained in the ‘Objectives’ section of the manuscript as follows:

The SAFEST project, that will be conducted from June 2022 to June 2026, aims to improve and harmonise perioperative quality of care and patient safety by reducing surgical adverse events through the establishment and implementation of widely supported perioperative patient-centred standardised practices.

We also aim to increase the adherence to patients' safety practices by identifying contextual factors (at macro-, meso- and micro-levels) that inhibit or promote the adoption, implementation, and sustainment of evidence-based patient safety practices. This information may be used to develop recommendations on the implementation of the standards in hospitals in various contexts across Europe to reduce knowledge-practice gaps.

• In addition, we have edited a relevant paragraph of the ‘Background’ section to better clarify this concept as follows:

Therefore, having a set of patient-centred, evidence-based, practices with a high level of consensus and a comprehensive tailored implementation strategy considering contextual factors at macro-, meso- and micro-levels, is a cornerstone to ensure access to safe, innovative, sustainable, and high-quality surgical care.

Responses to comments 10,11

• We would like to clarify that the multidisciplinary teams mentioned in the ‘Background’ refer to the people who developed the SAFEST project, whereas the multidisciplinary teams mentioned in the rest of the manuscript starting from the ‘Design’ section refers to the members involved in the hospitals and related healthcare facilities in which the study will be carried out. To better clarify this, we have moved the ‘Setting’ sub-section at the beginning of the ‘Methods’ section and edited the text of the ‘Design’ subsection by adding a clear and detailed description including the roles of the multidisciplinary teams in the design section as follows:

The SAFEST study is a mixed-methods hybrid type III implementation study supporting the development and implementation of evidence-based patient safety practices through a Quality Improvement Learning Collaborative (QILC) strategy and combining qualitative and quantitative evidence through a convergent segregated approach. The QILC will adopt a participatory design involving multidisciplinary teams of patients and clinical care providers per participating hospital and related healthcare facility, including surgeons, anaesthesiologists, nurses, quality experts, IT representatives and primary care providers among others. The QILC teams from various hospitals will gather for learning sessions to share and adopt best practices towards a common improvement goal.

Comment 12

Objectives

12. To clarify this project, it would benefit from identifying overarching research questions. Since you have three main outcomes (clinical effectiveness, patients’ perspectives, and the process of implementation) in focus, this would be feasible.

Response to comment 12

• We have edited the ‘Objectives’ section to better clarify the aims of the study as follows:

The SAFEST project, that will be conducted from June 2022 to June 2026, aims to improve and harmonise perioperative quality of care and patient safety by reducing surgical adverse events through the establishment and implementation of widely supported perioperative patient-centred standardised practices.

We also aim to increase the adherence to patients' safety practices by identifying contextual factors (at macro-, meso- and micro-levels) that inhibit or promote the adoption, implementation, and sustainment of evidence-based patient safety practices. This information may be used to develop recommendations on the implementation of the standards in hospitals in various contexts across Europe to reduce knowledge-practice gaps.

• Additionally, we edited the ‘Outcomes’ section by including the following four research questions:

1. Research question: How effectively are patient safety practices being adhered to in perioperative care?

2. Research question: What is the impact of adherence to patient safety practices on clinical effectiveness?

3. Research question: How do patients perceive the safety and quality of their surgical care?

4. Research question: What are the key implementation process outcomes and how do these factors influence the successful implementation of standardized practices in surgical settings?

Comments 13-19

Methods- P

Attachment Submitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx

10.1371/journal.pone.0304159.r003
Decision Letter 1
Sundqvist Ann-Sofie Academic Editor
© 2024 Ann-Sofie Sundqvist
2024
Ann-Sofie Sundqvist
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
Submission Version1
8 May 2024

Improving quality and patient safety in surgical care through standardisation and harmonisation of perioperative care (SAFEST project): a research protocol for a mixed methods study.

PONE-D-23-31626R1

Dear Dr. Valli,

We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.

Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.

An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.

If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.

Kind regards,

Ann-Sofie Sundqvist, Ass. Prof.

Academic Editor

PLOS ONE

Additional Editor Comments (optional):

Reviewers' comments:

10.1371/journal.pone.0304159.r004
Acceptance letter
Sundqvist Ann-Sofie Academic Editor
© 2024 Ann-Sofie Sundqvist
2024
Ann-Sofie Sundqvist
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
21 May 2024

PONE-D-23-31626R1

PLOS ONE

Dear Dr. Valli,

I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.

At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:

* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited

* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,

* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset

If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.

Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.

If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.

Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.

Kind regards,

PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff

on behalf of

Mrs. Ann-Sofie Sundqvist

Academic Editor

PLOS ONE
==== Refs
References

1 COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL on patient safety, including the prevention and control of healthcare-associated infections. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/transparency/documents-register/detail?ref=COM(2008)836&lang=en [Accessed 1 July 2022]
2 Österreich Forschungs Gesundheit und Planungs GmbH and SOGETI. Costs of unsafe care and cost effectiveness of patient safety programmes. Health and Food Safety, European Union 2016. Available: https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2017-02/2016_costs_psp_en_0.pdf [Accessed 8 August 2022]
3 Anderson O , Davis R , Hanna GB , et al . Surgical adverse events: a systematic review. Am. J. Surg. 2013; 206 (2 ), 253–262. doi: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2012.11.009 23642651
4 Schwendimann R , Blatter C , Dhaini S ., et al . The occurrence, types, consequences and preventability of in-hospital adverse events–a scoping review. BMC Health Serv Res 2018; 18 , 521. doi: 10.1186/s12913-018-3335-z 29973258
5 Panagioti M , Khan K , Keers RN , et al . Prevalence, severity, and nature of preventable patient harm across medical care settings: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2019; 366 : l4185. doi: 10.1136/bmj.l4185 31315828
6 Bates DW , Levine DM , Salmasian H , et al . The Safety of Inpatient Health Care. N Engl J Med. 2023 Jan 12;388 (2 ):142–153. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsa2206117 36630622
7 Connor L , Dean J , McNett M , et al . Evidence-based practice improves patient outcomes and healthcare system return on investment: Findings from a scoping review. Worldviews Evid Based Nurs. 2023 Feb;20 (1 ):6–15 doi: 10.1111/wvn.12621 36751881
8 Emond YEJJM , Calsbeek H , Peters YAS , et al . Increased adherence to perioperative safety guidelines associated with improved patient safety outcomes: a stepped-wedge, cluster-randomised multicentre trial. Br J Anaesth. 2022 Mar;128 (3 ):562–573. doi: 10.1016/j.bja.2021.12.019 35039174
9 Van Klei WA , Hoff RG , Van Aarnhem EE , et al . Effects of the introduction of the WHO "Surgical Safety Checklist" on in-hospital mortality: a cohort study. Ann Surg 2012;255 (1 ):44–9. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e31823779ae 22123159
10 Morris ZS , Wooding S , Grant J . The answer is 17 years, what is the question: understanding time lags in translational research. J R Soc Med 2011;104 (12 ):510–20. doi: 10.1258/jrsm.2011.110180 22179294
11 Kotzeva A , Guillamón I , Gracia J , et al . Use of clinical practice guidelines and factors related to their uptake: a survey of health professionals in Spain. J Eval Clin Pract 2014;20 (3 ):216–24. doi: 10.1111/jep.12109 24921083
12 Ariyo P , Zayed B , Riese V , et al . Implementation strategies to reduce surgical site infections: A systematic review. Infect. Control Hosp. Epidemiol. 2019; 40 (3 ), 287–300. doi: 10.1017/ice.2018.355 30786946
13 Ramsay N , Maresca G , Tully V , et al . Does a multidisciplinary approach have a beneficial effect on the development of a structured patient handover process between acute surgical wards in one of Scotland’s largest teaching hospitals? BMJ Open Qual 2018;7 (3 ): e000154. doi: 10.1136/bmjoq-2017-000154 30057950
14 Landes SJ , McBain SA , Curran GM . An introduction to effectiveness-implementation hybrid designs. Psychiatry Res. 2019 Oct; 280 :112513. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2019.112513 31434011
15 Hong Q.N. , Pluye P. , Bujold M. et al . Convergent and sequential synthesis designs: implications for conducting and reporting systematic reviews of qualitative and quantitative evidence. Syst Rev 6 , 61 (2017). doi: 10.1186/s13643-017-0454-2 28335799
16 Smith JD ., Li DH , Rafferty MR . The Implementation Research Logic Model: a method for planning, executing, reporting, and synthesizing implementation projects. Implementation Sci 2020; 15 , 84.
17 Damschroder LJ , Reardon CM , Widerquist MAO , Lowery J . The updated Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research based on user feedback. Implement Sci. 2022 Oct 29;17 (1 ):75. doi: 10.1186/s13012-022-01245-0 36309746
18 Emond Y.E. , Calsbeek H. , Teerenstra S. et al . Improving the implementation of perioperative safety guidelines using a multifaceted intervention approach: protocol of the IMPROVE study, a stepped wedge cluster randomized trial. Implementation Sci 2015; 10 , 3. doi: 10.1186/s13012-014-0198-5 25567584
19 Noordzij PG , Poldermans D , Schouten O , et al . Postoperative Mortality in The Netherlands: A Population-based Analysis of Surgery-specific Risk in Adults. Anesthesiology 2010; 112 :1105–1115. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e3181d5f95c 20418691
20 Wells S , Tamir O , Gray J , Naidoo D , Bekhit M , Goldmann D . Are quality improvement collaboratives effective? A systematic review. BMJ Qual Saf. 2018 Mar;27 (3 ):226–240. doi: 10.1136/bmjqs-2017-006926 Epub 2017 Oct 21. .29055899
21 Donabedian A. Evaluating the quality of medical care. 1966. Milbank Q. 2005;83 (4 ):691–729.16279964
22 Proctor E , Silmere H , Raghavan R , et al . Outcomes for implementation research: conceptual distinctions, measurement challenges, and research agenda. Adm Policy Ment Health. 2011;38 (2 ):65–76. doi: 10.1007/s10488-010-0319-7 20957426
23 Brouwers M , Kho ME , Browman GP , et al . AGREE II: Advancing guideline development, reporting and evaluation in healthcare. Can Med Assoc J. 2010; 182 (18 ): E839–42.20603348
24 Arnal-Velasco D , Rodríguez-Luna A , Valli C , Rodriguez A , Romero E , Fábregas N , et al . Synthesis of Evidence-Based Standardised Practices to Improve Perioperative Safety Period in Europe: Protocol of Systematic Review of Clinical Practice Guidelines- SAFEST project. PROSPERO 2022 CRD42022347449 Available from: https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?ID=CRD42022347449
25 Emond Y , Põlluste K , Kommusaar J , Pühvel J , Kangasniemi M , Calsbeek H , et al . Non-clinical-interventions to improve patient safety in the perioperative care process: an umbrella review PROSPERO 2023 CRD42023397419 Available from: https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?RecordID=397419
26 Nunes AB , Leite A , Teixeira JP , Paixão M , Orrego C , Valli C, L.A. et al . An umbrella review of outcomes and outcome measurement instruments for patient safety in perioperative care: developing a core outcome set for SAFEST project. PROSPERO 2022 CRD42022362921 Available from: https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?ID=CRD42022362921
27 Nunes AB , Sousa P , Leite A , Teixeira JP , Paixão M , Orrego C , et al . Core Outcome Set for patient safety in perioperative care: SAFEST Project. COMET Initiative 2022. Available from: https://www.comet-initiative.org/Studies/Details/2131
28 Abbott TEF , Ahmad T , Phull MK , et al . The surgical safety checklist and patient outcomes after surgery: a prospective observational cohort study, systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth. 2018;120 (1 ):146–155. doi: 10.1016/j.bja.2017.08.002 29397122
29 Palumbo R. Contextualizing Co-production of Health Care. A Systematic Literature Review. Int. J. Public Sect. Manag. 2016;29 :72–90.
30 Najjar PA , Strickland M , Kaplan RS . Time-Driven Activity-Based Costing for Surgical Episodes.JAMA Surg. 2017;152 (1 ):96–97. doi: 10.1001/jamasurg.2016.3356 27806172
31 International Network of Health Promoting Hospitals and Health Services. Self-Assessment Tool for implementing the 2020 Standards for Health Promoting Hospitals and Health Services, Version 1.1. Hamburg, Germany: International HPH Network; November 2021.
32 Gonzalez-Pizarro P , Brazzi L , Koch S , et al . European Society of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care consensus document on sustainability: 4 scopes to achieve a more sustainable practice. European Journal of Anaesthesiology. 2024 Apr;41 (4 ):260–277. doi: 10.1097/EJA.0000000000001942 38235604
33 National Institute for Health and Care Research Global Health Research Unit on Global Surgery. Reducing the environmental impact of surgery on a global scale: systematic review and co-prioritization with healthcare workers in 132 countries. Br J Surg. 2023 Jun 12;110 (7 ):804–817. doi: 10.1093/bjs/znad092 37079880
