
==== Front
Protein Pept Lett
Protein Pept Lett
PPL
Protein and Peptide Letters
0929-8665
1875-5305
Bentham Science Publishers

PPL-31-192
10.2174/0109298665286952240212053723
Life Sciences, Protein and Peptide Sciences, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Plasma/Serum Proteomics based on Mass Spectrometry
Zhu Yiying 1*
1 Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
* Address correspondence to this author at the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China; E-mail: yiying_zhu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
25 4 2024
25 4 2024
31 3 192208
22 11 2023
22 1 2024
31 1 2024
© 2024 Bentham Science Publishers
2024
Bentham Science Publishers
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Bentham Science Publisher. This is an open access article published under CC BY 4.0 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode)
Human blood is a window of physiology and disease. Examination of biomarkers in blood is a common clinical procedure, which can be informative in diagnosis and prognosis of diseases, and in evaluating treatment effectiveness. There is still a huge demand on new blood biomarkers and assays for precision medicine nowadays, therefore plasma/serum proteomics has attracted increasing attention in recent years. How to effectively proceed with the biomarker discovery and clinical diagnostic assay development is a question raised to researchers who are interested in this area. In this review, we comprehensively introduce the background and advancement of technologies for blood proteomics, with a focus on mass spectrometry (MS). Analyzing existing blood biomarkers and newly-built diagnostic assays based on MS can shed light on developing new biomarkers and analytical methods. We summarize various protein analytes in plasma/serum which include total proteome, protein post-translational modifications, and extracellular vesicles, focusing on their corresponding sample preparation methods for MS analysis. We propose screening multiple protein analytes in the same set of blood samples in order to increase success rate for biomarker discovery. We also review the trends of MS techniques for blood tests including sample preparation automation, and further provide our perspectives on their future directions.

Keywords

Proteomics
plasma/serum
mass spectrometry
diagnostic test
liquid biopsy
biomarker
clinical assay
==== Body
pmc1 INTRODUCTION

Liquid biopsy tests have a rich value in clinical settings, including diagnosis and prognosis of diseases, evaluation of treatment effectiveness, and risks. Blood specimens are relatively stable and can be easily accessed; therefore, they are the most widely used clinical liquid specimens. Three types of blood samples are collected, namely whole blood, plasma, and serum. Whole blood samples are usually used for determining blood cells: white blood cells, platelets, and red blood cells. Plasma and serum samples, which are the liquid portions of whole blood, are mostly used for clinical blood tests. Plasma is the upper part of the blood collected after the addition of anticoagulants (such as EDTA, heparin, and citrate) and centrifugation. Serum is the upper part of the blood after centrifugation when no anticoagulant is added to the blood. Fibrin blood clots, which are formed by coagulation factors combined with thrombin and fibrinogen, are precipitated and free from serum. Therefore, plasma and serum are not exactly the same in components; however, in most tests, they are interchangeable. There are different components in plasma and serum, in addition to cells in whole blood, including proteins, metabolites, nucleic acids, and other molecules. The majority of current blood biomarkers for routine diagnostic tests is proteins. However, the other components have limitations regarding their potential use as markers. For example, circulating tissue cells (CTC) released from tumors are used for monitoring cancer processes and treatment effectiveness but not for early diagnosis [1-3]. Circulating DNAs and mRNAs usually indicate probability risks [4, 5] and have been successfully applied in prenatal diagnosis [6-8]. Small-molecule metabolites, which have been studied extensively for clinical applications [9], can reveal patient phenotypes and biological mechanisms, including enzymatic and filtration processes. However, they are products of life processes and therefore only reveal limited information compared to proteins.

Current routine diagnostic tests are primarily based on blood protein biomarkers. They can be classified into three categories [10, 11]: 1) proteins that perform normal functions, such as human serum albumin (HSA) and apolipoproteins, which constitute the majority of the clinical test measures; 2) proteins released from tissues, such as aspartate aminotransferase (ASAT), alanine amino-transferase (ALAT), cardiac troponins, and tumor markers; and 3) signaling molecules and receptor ligands, such as small protein hormones (e.g., insulin) and cytokines. In current medical practice, most clinical blood protein tests measure the level(s) of a single or a few protein(s) for decision-making. For example, diagnosis of acute events of troponin in myocardial infarction, thyroglobulin for detection of metastatic thyroid cancer recurrence after thyroid removal, and C-reactive protein for infection or inflammation [12]. Protein abundance ratios are used in some cases. Examples include the De Ritis ASAT/ALAT ratio to differentiate between the causes of liver disease [13] and the sFlt-1/PlGF ratio for the diagnosis of preeclampsia [14]. Modifications in specific proteins can also be used as markers. The core-fucosylated α-fetoprotein (AFP-L3) has been applied for the early diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma. Glycated hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels serve as an indicator of long-term glucose exposure in the context of diabetes.

There is still a huge need for new blood tests to be developed for the early and companion diagnosis and monitoring of conditions and diseases. In addition to the techniques applied for protein identification and quantification in plasma and serum, the basics are also important for biomarker discovery and assay development. First, there is a consensus in the field of proteomics that it is critical to establish an organized integrated pipeline for blood biomarker discovery, validation, and assay development. The standardization of pre-analytics such as collection method, sample volume, storage temperature, processing, and analytics such as carryover, accuracy, precision, analytical sensitivity/specificity, and limit of detection/quantification has been extensively discussed in other review [11]. Plasma samples are mostly preferred to serum samples for biomarker studies, when the anticoagulant is tightly controlled. Plasma proteomes can be obtained reproducibly by using collection tubes preloaded with anticoagulants, and can delay sample preparation until 1 week at 4°C and until 25 freeze-thaw cycles [15-20]. Second, the study design is critical for blood proteomic research and assay development. The key gaps between disease diagnosis and intervention must be identified. Doctors typically recognize urgent clinical questions requiring blood tests. In addition, pharmaceutical companies that require the determination of a population to receive treatment for a particular drug or evaluation of the effectiveness of a drug require blood-companion diagnostic methods. It would be very beneficial for a public source, such as a website or national lab, to collect urgent problems and share them with the community. Third, sample sources are important, as clinical test development usually involves a large-scale study. At least 1500 samples are needed to validate a potential biomarker for further development of clinical diagnostic tests [21]. Hospitals, clinics, and clinical laboratories are the primary sources of human blood samples; biobanks are another source of bioliquids. For example, the UK Biobank has recruited over half a million UK participants and served researchers worldwide [22, 23]. The Shanghai Zhangjiang Biobank in China is projected to reach a storage capacity of 10 million human-derived samples, including plasma samples. Commercially available samples, such as those from the Plasma Services Group (Moorestown, NJ, USA), are used. Collecting and locating large amounts of blood samples under strict collection protocols with good records of patient information and classification remain challenging. For example, without proper handling, samples may contain proteins from blood cells, called hemolysis contamination, and blood cell proteins may falsely be taken to indicate the involvement of some pathways or identified as biomarkers; therefore, Greyer et al. profiled the total proteome of erythrocytes and platelets as an indicator of contamination from hemolysis in samples [24]. There are resources for the systematic classification of diseases that help differentiate patient cohorts, such as the International Statistical Classification of Diseases (https://icd.who.int/browse10/2019/en) and human phenome ontology, which can be used for precise phenotyping of patients [25].

2 PROTEOMICS TECHNOLOGIES

2.1 Affinity Reagents-based Technologies

Various proteomic technologies have emerged, which can be divided into affinity- and MS-based techniques. In this section, we briefly review the mechanisms of several popular methods based on affinity reagents antibodies and aptamers. Polyclonal antibodies are complex reagents produced by the animal immune system. In contrast, monoclonal antibodies bind to one antigen/epitope usually produced by hybridoma technology or as recombinant proteins. Traditional western blotting and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) are low-throughput techniques. Proteins are spotted and bound onto a nitrocellulose membrane or coated onto a multi-well plate. Signal detection is based on chemiluminescent or fluorescent probes. New antibody-based technologies have increased the sample throughput and multiplexing ability based on novel protein spotting and detection methods, as shown in Figure (1). Proximity extension assay (PEA) by Olink (Uppsala, Sweden) is a special type of multiplexed antibody-based immunoassay. Two antibodies bind to one protein with the interaction domains in close proximity. Each antibody contains one DNA Oligonucleotide that can hybridize with each other. After the signal is transferred from the protein to DNA, it can be amplified by PCR and further detected by NGS or qPCR [26]. Reverse phase protein array (RPPA) is based on spotting proteins on nitrocellulose-coated glass slides and probing them with antibodies. This enables hundreds of microspots to be detected simultaneously on one slide [27]. Single-molecule array (SIMOA) bead technology from Quanterix (MA, USA) is highly sensitive. First, protein samples are added to antibody-coupled paramagnetic beads, followed by the addition of antibodies to form a sandwich, similar to standard sandwich ELISA. The sample is loaded into femtoliter-sized wells large enough for one bead, the so-called single-molecule array, and then visualized using enzyme-amplified florescence imaging [28]. The multi-analyte profiling (xMAP) protein assay (Luminex, TX, USA) is a bead-based immunoassay. A mixture of color-coded beads pre-coated with antibodies binds the analytes of interest and then conjugates biotinylated detection antibodies coupled with phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated streptavidin. Multiplexed proteins are detected by a dual-laser flow-based detection instrument, where one laser classifies beads, determining the type of protein, and the other laser excites PE, indicating the number of analytes captured [29]. Aptamers, synthetic ligands made of DNA, RNA, or peptide, are another type of affinity reagents [30]. SomaScan is a representative aptamer-based protein assay based on the ssDNA SOMAmer reagent (SomaLogic, CO, USA). Bead-immobilized SOMAmers interact with target proteins and label them with biotin, after which the SOMAmers are photocleaved from the beads. After biotinylated proteins with SOMAmers are purified using monomeric avidin beads, SOMAmers are released and quantified by DNA-based technology [30]. These affinity-based technologies are discussed in more detail in other reviews [31-33].

2.2 MS-based Technologies

MS is the only method that can detect proteins and their post-translational modifications (PTMs) without prior knowledge of the sample, whereas other affinity-based methods limit the detection of targets within the affinity reagent library. MS measures the mass-to-charge ratio of molecules, decodes amino acid sequences, and detects modifications in their side chains or termini. Here, we introduce the basic knowledge and terminology of MS and discuss the suitability of different MS technologies for clinical proteomics research and assay development. There are different types of MS instruments, which are categorized by their various ionization sources and mass analyzers. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) and electrospray ionization (ESI) are the two most popular ionization sources. Surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization (SELDI), a variant of MALDI, is valuable in clinical proteomics. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved MS-based diagnostic assay, OVA1, which combines five protein biomarkers for ovarian cancer, was developed using the SELDI-TOF platform [34, 35]. Time-of-flight (TOF) and orbitrap are the most popular high-resolution and high-mass-accuracy mass analyzers, whereas quadruple (Q) is the most popular mass filter. Recently, the analyzer Astral in Orbitrap Astral (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) has emerged as a powerful analyzer with higher speed than TOF and orbitrap [36]. MALDI-TOF has already been widely applied in microorganism characterization in clinical settings by detecting abundant proteins in whole-cell lysates, such as ribosomes, which serve as biomarkers for microbial species [37-41]. With the assistance of artificial intelligence (AI) data interpretation, MALDI-TOF spectra can be used to predict antimicrobial drug resistance [42]. MALDI-TOF measures the mass-to-charge ratios of whole proteins in microbiological studies, which is called top-down proteomics. In contrast, bottom-up proteomics applies a workflow that employs proteases to cleave proteins, analyzes peptides by MS, and then composes protein information through the identified peptides (Figure 2). Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) is a strategy for deciphering the structures of molecules in which molecular ions (precursor ions) are scanned, selected, and fragmented, and fragment ions (product ions) are pictured as MS/MS spectra. MS/MS data can be used to identify peptides and their PTMs by utilizing search algorithms to match the mass-to-charge ratios of product ions between data from the spectra and in silico data predicted from a protein database. Tandem MS instruments equipped with MALDI, the so-called MALDI MS/MS, have become more and more popular [43]. Sometimes for convenience, MALDI TOF/TOF are referred to as MALDI-TOF which is regarded as a general name for the MS instrument equipped with MALDI and TOF. Tandem MS instruments equipped with ESI are usually coupled with liquid chromatography to separate the digested peptide mixture, which is the so-called LC-MS/MS where the word “ESI” is always omitted. This enables the measurement of thousands of proteins in one run within a short period [44]. Both MALDI-TOF and LC-MS/MS have a bright future in clinical settings. By comparing them, it is easy to reach a conclusion on their pros and cons and their suitability for particular projects. MALDI-TOF is easier and faster; however, it requires biomarkers to be abundant and prominent in the protein mixture. LC-MS/MS is more complex and slower but can detect many more proteins and decipher their peptide sequence structures. Therefore, LC-MS/MS is commonly used in biomarker discovery and protein modification studies. With recent developments, LC-MS/MS has become much faster and more stable; therefore, it has growing potential for the development of clinical assays. There are many variations and improvement in LC-MS/MS. For example, a scanning mode called data-independent acquisition (DIA), which differs from traditional data-dependent acquisition (DDA), collects fragments from all ions within defined m/z windows and provides the advantage of improved reproducibility, which is particularly valuable in large population studies. Isobaric labeling methodologies in LC-MS/MS, such as tandem mass tag (TMT), enable 18 channel multiplexed analysis and increase the peptide identification number per unit time [45]. Ion mobility technology coupled with MS, called field asymmetric ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) and trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS), measures the sizes and shapes of analytes and provides another dimension of separation in addition to retention time, m/z, and peak intensities, thereby enhancing proteome coverage, and has been regularly applied in plasma/serum proteomics research [46-51]. In general, current clinical proteomics research reviewed here focuses mostly on LC-MS/MS and some on MALDI-TOF. We believe that LC-MS/MS will find application in clinical laboratories in the near future.

Targeted proteomics, in contrast to the aforementioned untargeted proteomics, monitors target peptides by sensitively deep scanning their precursor and product ions. Nature Methods chose targeted proteomics based on MS as the Method of choice in 2012 [52]. Multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) using triple quadrupole (QqQ) MS and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) using quadruple Orbitrap/TOF instruments are targeted proteomic techniques. For decades, targeted MS has been used for the absolute quantification of small molecules in the pharmaceutical industry. QqQ and Q-Orbitrap or TOF are both (ESI)-LC-MS/MS types of MS instruments, whereas QqQ is the most popular one in targeted MS instruments because of its low cost and high speed. There are advanced targeted methods in advanced MS instruments based on spiked-in peptides to trigger the acquisition of targeted analytes that require no more retention time scheduling, such as TOMAHAQ [53], pseudo-PRM [54], and SureQuant [55]. The two advantages of targeted proteomics over conventional protein detection technology ELISA/western blotting and affinity-based methodologies are high specificity and multiplexing ability. High specificity comes from the direct measurement of peptides based on their mass-to-charge ratios, rather than signal transfer from affinity-binding reagents. For example, antithyroglobulin autoantibodies in the serum/plasma interfere with the thyroglobulin immunoassay, and MS provides a more accurate assay [56]. Another advantage of MS-based assays is that they enable multiple protein quantifications within one analysis, which greatly saves analytical time and reduces the required sample amount.

Enrichment or purification steps are critical for high-sensitivity analysis of low-abundance proteins or peptides. Coupling purification and enrichment with targeted MS combines the advantages of high sensitivity and specificity. Site-specific analysis of PTMs can be performed to enrich and analyze peptides carrying PTMs. Peptide enrichment is expected to be more sensitive than protein enrichment because it removes signal interference from other peptides of protein targets and their binding partners. We observed many examples of clinical assays developed using this method. Stable isotope standards and capture by anti-peptide antibodies (SISCAPA) by SISCAPA assay technologies (Washington D. C., USA) apply anti-peptide antibodies coupled to magnetic beads to enrich targeted peptides and then utilize MS to quantify peptides with the addition of stable isotope-labeled (SIL) peptides as internal standards [57, 58]. Antibody-conjugated nanodisk methods by NanoPin Technologies (Louisiana, USA) are applied to enrich target peptides from trypsin-digested serum samples to diagnose tuberculosis (TB) [59]. Clinical MS studies require good quality control for discovery and validation; therefore, internal standards and reference materials are important [60]. Generally, they are heavy isotope versions of the target peptides or recombinant proteins expressed with 13C-labeled arginine and lysine. For example, isotopically labeled IgG serves as the internal standard [61, 62]. Heavy isotope-labeled peptides are mostly used in targeted MS assays because of the relative simplicity of acquiring them [63]. The PQ500 reference peptides from Biognosis (Schlieren, Switzerland), which contain standard peptides for hundreds of plasma proteins, are good examples of commercialized heavy isotope-labeled plasma protein standard peptides for clinical studies [64].

Raw MS data must be processed to obtain meaningful information. First, raw data from LC-MS/MS contain several features, including mass-to-charge ratios (m/z), retention times (RT), and signal abundances of precursor and product ions, whereas MALDI-TOF data do not contain retention time features. Normally, the data go through a search algorithm that matches the mass-to-charge ratios of the product ions to those from the protein database to identify the peptides and their PTMs. Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA), MaxQuant (https://www.maxquant.org) for DDA data, Spectronaut (Biognosis, Switzerland), and DIA-NN [65] for DIA data are all in this category. Protein glycosylation is the most complex PTM. Although other PTMs, such as phosphorylation, methylation, and acetylation, can be analyzed using the abovementioned software, glycosylation requires specific software for analysis. In an evaluation conducted by the community, including vendors and users of glycoproteomics informatics solutions [66] by comparing search results of the same files from serum glycopeptides, Protein Prospector [67] and Byonics (Protein Metrics, CA, USA) [68] stand out, providing high-performance software solutions for glycoproteomics, detecting hundreds of unique N-glycopeptides in serum. Publicly available software called pGlyco is another powerful tool for glycopeptide identification with robust quality control and false discovery rate (FDR) estimation, with unique features for glycan structure isomer differentiation [69, 70]. Glycopeptide quantification is mostly performed using label-free methods; other methods are discussed in more detail in another review [71]. The next part of the data analysis involves quantification after peptide identification. Most search algorithms contain a quantification module that is mainly based on the label-free method. Skyline is a quantitative software that can analyze data from various instruments and software. In Skyline, missing peaks or other errors in peak integration, which are factors that impair quantitation accuracy, can be trained or manually corrected. Efforts have been made to improve the peak integration of software for clinical data [72]. Finally, a table of proteins and their relative/absolute quantitation is sent for data mining; for example, statistical analyses for the identification of significant changes among different conditions and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis, which shows the relationship between sensitivity and specificity for evaluating diagnostic performance. Recently, AI for proteomic data analysis has become increasingly popular; it finds rules among large amounts of data, although it is important to make the fitting more explainable because the mystery of data processing will prevent clinicians from using them [73]. Raw data from MALDI-TOF and LC-MS have been used for direct data analysis without database searching [42, 74]. It is expected that the advancement of data analysis ability and AI interpretation of raw data without manipulating the database search will become popular.

3 ANALYTES AND CORRESPONDING SAMPLE PREPARATION METHODS IN PLASMA/SERUM PROTEOMIC STUDIES

Discovery-based plasma/serum proteomics studies may target different analytes, from basic total proteome to protein PTMs to extracellular vesicles’ proteome (Figure 3). We summarized their MS-based analytical methods, focusing on sample preparation methodologies and recent advances.

3.1 Total Proteome

Plasma/serum proteome analysis by MS faces significant difficulties because the concentrations of plasma/serum proteins vary up to the order of 1012, which is far beyond the dynamic range of MS. Reported concentrations of plasma proteins have been deposited in the blood proteomics database [75]. For example, the base level of interleukin-6 is approximately 5 pg/mL and the level of HSA is approximately 50 mg/mL. Fourteen of the most abundant proteins in the blood account for 95% of the total proteome in the blood, blocking the detection of the remaining low-abundance proteins. Currently, global MS has ng/mL sensitivity, whereas immunoassays have pg/mL sensitivity. To improve plasma proteome coverage, and before analysis by LC-MS/MS, plasma proteins are separated by an additional dimension, either off-line or on-line, such as gel electrophoresis, high-pH reversed-phase liquid chromate-graphy, size-exclusion chromatography, hydrophilic interaction chromatography, ion-exchange chromatography, and capillary electrophoresis [76]. With extensive fractionation and a long LC gradient, thousands of proteins can be detected in undepleted serum [77]. However, fractionation/separation inevitably requires time and leads to irreproducibility. The use of disposable or regenerable antibody columns/beads to conduct immunodepletion is a regular procedure for plasma/serum studies [78-81]. For example, Keshishian et al. applied IgY14 and SuperMix for abundant plasma protein depletion, combining isobaric labeling. An average of 4600 plasma proteins per sample were identified and 3400 proteins were quantified across 16 patients by a Q-Orbitrap MS instrument analysis [82]. However, the depletion step itself may cause problems, such as co-purification of proteins both specifically and non-specifically bound to abundant proteins and beads, making the procedure time-consuming, difficult to automate, and to perform with high throughput. Recently, a platform integrating nanoparticle protein corona to increase the depth of plasma proteome analysis in LC-MS/MS was developed and commercialized by Seer (MA, USA) [83-85]. With the aid of nanoparticle reagents, over a thousand proteins can be quickly identified and quantified in plasma using a simple procedure that reaches the proteome concentration range in which most FDA-approved plasma protein biomarkers lie [11].

3.2 Glycation and Glycosylation of Plasma/Serum Proteins

Protein glycation is a process in which glycans are nonenzymatically added to proteins. Advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) such as N-carboxymethyl-lysine (CML) and N-carboxyethyl-lysine (CEL) are produced by glycation [86]. AGEs not only accelerate the aging of the human body but also lead to the occurrence of many diseases [87-91]. Glycation of plasma proteins has a rich diagnostic value. The HbA1c test, which measures the percentage of glycated form in total hemoglobin, is a common blood test for the diagnosis of type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Efforts have been made to improve blood tests for diabetes by targeting other glycated blood biomarkers or applying new technologies, such as MS analysis of glycated end-product-modified peptides of HSA and beta-hemoglobin for better diagnostics [92]. Most human proteins are glycosylated by the enzymatic covalent addition of glycans. N-Linked and O-linked glycosylations are the most common types. Approximately 2600 N-linked glycosides and 1500 glycoproteins in human serum and plasma have been reported at the time of the review [93]. Glycosylation MS is difficult because of the wide variety and complex structures of glycans [94]. Glycans exhibit mass-to-charge ratios in MS Therefore, stereoisomers are usually classified into different categories. For example, glucose (Glc), galactose (Gal), and mannose (Man) are hexoses (Hex), and N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) are N-acetylhexosamines (HexNAc). In some cases, secondary and multistage MS incorporating the fragmentation of glycosidic bonds are used to resolve stereoisomers. For example, the relative abundances of oxonium ions can be used to differentiate between GlcNac and GalNac [95]. The structural isomers of glycans are recorded in some glycan databases, such as GlycomeDB [96, 97]. Search algorithms, such as pGlyco, for glycopeptides, can differentiate glycan structural isomers based on their different fragmentation types on glycosidic bonds. The fragmentation types in MS are important for glycoproteomics. Traditional collision-induced dissociation (CID), high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD), electrotransfer dissociation (ETD), and combinations of these, such as Stepped CID or EThcD, are methods that induce the breakage of amide and glycosidic bonds. Ultraviolet photodissociation (UVPD) is a promising dissociation method for a small-scale O-glycopeptide characterization [98]. By manipulating the energy of ion dissociation, studies are aiming to obtain a comprehensive mapping of peptides and glycans.

Analysis methods for protein glycosylation can release glycans and analyze the released sugar molecules or plain peptides [99] or directly analyze glycopeptides. Endoglycosidase cleaves glycans from the attached amino acid residues. PNGase is commonly used for the cleavage of N-glycans. A universal endo-O-glycosidase for O-glycans is not yet to be identified. Chemical beta-elimination approaches to release O-glycans are popular, but they can introduce side reactions, whereas some enzymes such as OpeRATOR and ImpaRATOR (Genovis, MA, USA) can cleave N-terminal of O-glycans attached serine and threonine [100, 101]. The direct analysis of glycopeptides is complicated; therefore, it is limited to simple proteins and requires manual validation. Recent technological advancements have enabled the analysis of glycopeptides globally. This review focuses on glycopeptide methodologies that have been applied in human plasma/serum proteomics [102-106]. Some of these have turned into blood diagnostic tests. For example, InterVenn Biosciences (CA, USA) established diagnostic tests based on the MS analysis of blood glycoproteins [107].

Enrichment of glycated peptides/glycopeptides prior to LC-MS/MS analysis is important because of their relatively low abundance. Borate/boronate affinity purification is popular for glycated peptides, and dozens to hundreds of glycated proteins have been identified in human serum and plasma [108-110]. Recently, AGE antibodies have been produced, providing an exciting way to analyze plasma protein AGEs [111]. Other reviews have discussed glycoproteomic enrichment strategies for MS analysis in detail [112, 113]. This review focuses on the methods that have already been applied to plasma samples. Lectins are proteins with a special affinity for glycans and provide specific enrichment methods for targeted glycan types [114, 115]. There is a large number of lectins available for glycoproteomics, such as concanavalin A (ConA) for mannose and glucose and wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) for N-acetylglucosamine and sialic acid [116]. Antibodies, as classical affinity reagents, provide methods for some types of glycosylated peptides, such as O-GlcNAc-modified peptides [117]. Other enrichment methods are available based on electrostatic and hydrophilic interactions with glycans, such as immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) for sialic acid containing glycopeptides [118-120], hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) [121-123], anion-exchange chromatography (AEC) [124], and electrostatic repulsion–hydrophilic interaction chromate-graphy (ERLIC) [125, 126]. Covalent addition based on chemical reactions is popular in glycoproteomics, such as hydrazide chemistry for O-GalNAc-modified proteins [127] and boronic acid-based chemistry for the universal enrichment of glycopeptides [128, 129], although they may induce side reactions and impact the results. To date, a high-throughput, simple glycopeptide enrichment strategy is still lacking or is not precise and widely accessible, although researchers are working on improving it [130]. In addition to the analysis of global glycosylation, it is valuable to analyze the glycosylation of target proteins to evaluate their impact on the activity or structure of the protein. In this case, if the protein is present in a complex mixture, an enrichment step for the target protein is required. For example, protein A beads for IgG or acid precipitation for AGP have been applied before the further purification of glycopeptides by HILIC chromatography or solid-phase extraction (SPE). Using these methods, researchers found higher fucosylation and sialylation of IgG subclasses in patients with pancreatitis than in patients with pancreatic cancer [61, 62], increased N-glycan branching, and lower sialylation of N-glycans on specific AGP glycosylation sites in individuals with hyperglycemia at high risk of diabetes [131].

3.3 Other PTMs of Plasma/Serum Proteins

Other protein PTMs in the plasma/serum can also serve as biomarkers [132, 133]; therefore, by analyzing them, we may find a connection between diseases or the effects of drug treatment and in vitro test methods for detecting them. Modified peptides are usually low-abundance; therefore, an enrichment step is necessary to analyze them by MS. Total phosphorylation of serine/threonine/tyrosine is commonly analyzed after enrichment of phosphorylated peptides by TiO2 or IMAC column/cartridge. Tyrosine phosphorylation accounts for a small percentage of total phosphorylation, and therefore requires an antibody for enrichment [134]. To date, many important PTMs have commercially available antibody affinity reagents [117, 135-138], which may be sequentially applied to samples to identify multiple PTMs in limited-amount samples. Gu et al. found abnormal lysine acetylation and arginine methylation in the sera of patients with acute myelogenous leukemia, breast cancer, and non-small-cell lung cancer [139]. As observed and surveyed by the author, this type of study is still rare, mainly because of the limitations of antibody reagents, which are only sold in kit format for tissue- or cell-based samples with limited immunoprecipitation numbers. With the incorporation of high-throughput and automated methods and the versatility of commercial antibodies in bulk format, they will become more popular in plasma/serum proteomics studies.

Endogenous peptides in the plasma or serum owing to proteolysis may be considered as a special type of PTM. In this category, targeted MS analysis of amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides for diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease is a good example. Aβ peptides are cleaved from the Aβ precursor and vary in length with differences of only a few amino acids (Figure 4). Aβ deposition in the brain is the earliest pathological signature of Alzheimer’s disease. Using plasma biomarkers in predicting brain Aβ burden is beneficial for early detection and intervention of the disease, and also valuable for evaluating the effects of drugs that have potential for treating the disease. Nakamura et al. established a method incorporating immunoaffinity enrichment of plasma Aβ peptides and MALDI-TOF testing of the ratios of Aβ precursor protein (APP)669-711/Aβ1-42 and Aβ1-40/Aβ1-42, and their composites, to predict individual brain Aβ status [140]. They utilized magnetic bead bound anti-Aβ1-16 monoclonal antibody 6E10 (BioLegend, CA, USA) to enrich all three peptides, of which the affinity epitope lies within amino acids 3-8 of Aβ (EFRHDS) (Figure 4). LC-MS/MS, which provides higher sensitivity and specificity than MALDI-TOF, can also be applied for plasma Aβ peptide testing. Kirmess et al. utilized HJ5.1 monoclonal antibody (C2N Diagnostics, MO, USA), which has affinity to amino acids 13-28 of Aβ, to extract plasma Aβ peptides, applied Lys-N to digest plasma Aβ peptides at lysine 28 (Figure 4), and then employed LC-MS/MS to analyze the digested Aβ peptides [141]. These MS-based methods are proved to be more sensitive than ELISA test for Aβ peptides in human plasma.

Global peptidomic mapping is a method used to discover abnormal proteolytic activities. For example, a large number of circulating endogenous peptides in the plasma of patients with septic shock suggest significant systemic proteolysis, and further analysis of cleavage sites on the original proteins indicates a predominant role for serine proteases [142]. Clinical peptidomics, especially blood peptidomics based on MS, have been comprehensively reviewed in other studies [143, 144].

3.4 Extracellular Vesicles in Plasma/Serum

Much attention has been focused on the application of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in novel diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for various conditions such as cancers, neurodegenerative disorders, and cardiovascular diseases [145-147]. EVs are phospholipid bilayer membrane-enclosed structures containing RNAs, proteins, lipids, metabolites, and other molecules. Plasma EVs originate from circulating cells and endothelial cells owing to their constant interaction with blood flow, which can act as a mirror of cell status. They can generally be categorized into two main types according to their sizes and secretion pathways: large EVs, such as microvesicles (100-350 nm) released directly from the cell membrane, and small EVs, such as exosomes (30-150 nm) released by fusion of multivesicular bodies (MVBs) to the plasma membrane [148]. For biomarker discovery research, total proteomes in EVs are usually characterized. The PTMs in EVs may also serve as candidate biomarkers. For example, phosphoproteins in plasma EVs are candidate markers of breast cancer [149], and phosphoproteomic and N-glycoproteomic analyses can be sequentially performed in plasma-derived EVs [150].

The heterogeneity of EV enrichment methods may result in different populations and purities of EVs. Differential centrifugation methods remain the gold standard for EV purification, whereas the use of sucrose or iodixanol gradients in ultracentrifugation can eliminate nonspecific binding. Other purification methods include filtration, immunoaffinity purification, precipitation, and size-exclusion chromatography, which can be broadly applied in labs [151-154], together with several commercial kits already introduced to the market [155]. Because different purification methods may lead to substantially varying EV profiling results, the chosen method, including options for purchasing commercial kits, should be seriously considered when designing discovery and downstream validation experiments. To confirm the presence and purity of EVs after purification, microscopy and imaging technologies such as transmission electron microscopy (TEM) can be used. Characterization of protein markers in EVs can also be used. Proteins from the following classes can be used to demonstrate the presence of EVs: transmembrane or glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins associated with plasma membranes and/or endosomes (e.g. CD63, CD81) and cytosolic proteins (e.g. ALIX, HSC70) [154]. Immunoaffinity-based isolation strategies use antibody–antigen interactions to target specific populations of EVs. The immunocapture technique is considered the only one that can be directed toward the capture of a pure exosome population; therefore, it has been applied in many studies [156-159]. For example, tumor cell-derived exosomes (TEX) have emerged as key players in cancer progression. Capturing melanoma TEX with an anti-CSPG4 antibody and exosomes produced by T cells with an anti-CD3 antibody sequentially can isolate two subsets of patients with melanoma [160, 161]. Colon epithelial cell-specific A33 antibody was used to purify colorectal TEX [162].

4 TRENDS IN MS-BASED BLOOD PROTEOMICS

4.1 High-throughput and Automated Sample Prepa-ration

Proteomic sample preparation can be tedious, low-throughput, and easily introduces errors, which hinder the application of proteomic technology. Researchers have made significant efforts to achieve high-throughput and automated sample preparation, especially in plasma proteomics, and major improvements have been reviewed in detail [163, 164]. Generally, plasma proteomic sample preparation includes experimental steps of protein solubilization, digestion, depletion or enrichment, and desalting. The majority of these actions involve liquid handling steps with mixing and temperature control. Liquid handling robots for micro-chromatography-assisted sample preparation couple with multichannel pipettes, heating/shaking models, vacuum filtration, and magnetic bead stations. The replacement of manual pipettes with robotic liquid-handler systems increases analytical reproducibility. The SISCAPA methodology from SISCAPA assay technologies (Washington D. C., USA) incorporates immunoaffinity purification in sample preparation. Robots, such as the Bravo liquid handler (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA) [165, 166] and the KingFisher magnetic particle processor (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) [58, 167] are suitable for immunoaffinity purification. Immunoaffinity purification is executed by pipetting/shaking, mixing the slurry with a magnetic station or cartridge/column/tips of protein A/G on top of pipetting, and slowly passing the solvent to the antibody-bound stationary phase to carry on the binding, washing, and separation steps. In addition to immunoaffinity purification, enrichment/separation steps using lectins and HILIC for glycosylated proteins or EVs can also be automated. Clean-up automation can be incorporated into the sample-introduction system of MS. Rapidfire (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA) is an integrated autosampler for ultrafast sample clean-up with automated SPE coupled to a QqQ MS [58]. The Evosep One LC system (Evosep Biosystems, Denmark) is a high-throughput automated uHPLC that incorporates automated SPE sample clean-up that can be matched to different types of MS instruments [168].

The challenge of using robots is that they require skilled technicians. Most of the time, there is a need for significant time to develop and implement protocols. Users are also required to spend time on routine maintenance and troubleshooting. Therefore, the simpler the steps are, the better. In addition to the costs of the instrument, consumables are usually vendor-specific, which leads to challenges in obtaining them and could be affected by supply shortages and high costs. Without automation, a high-throughput method with manual manipulation would also be interesting for the development of mini devices and associated consumables. The use of 96- or 384-well plates with manual or electronic multichannel pipettes may enable the processing of multiple samples for liquid handling. Tips or 96–364-well plates with C18 or other packing materials under centrifugation or pressure systems enable multisample enrichment and desalting. The 96-well plate format is the most common for proteomics when dealing with sample volumes of a few to two hundred microliter levels [169]. We look forward to the same platforms that could be used in both biomarker and clinical assay developments, which could eliminate the development of immunoassays for IVD and significantly speed up the development of new clinical assays.

4.2 Fast and Miniature MS

MS has become much faster in recent years and provides the ability to perform deep proteome analysis for biomarker discovery. Recently released Orbitrap Astral MS instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) analyzed eight thousand cellular proteins within 8 min, significantly increasing the throughput of MS analysis [36]. QqQ and MALDI-TOF are the most commonly used MS instruments for protein assays in clinics and pharmaceutical companies [43, 170, 171]. There is an increasing need for the application of MS in clinical research and assay validation. In this case, their large size, high requirement for vacuum and electronic systems, and high cost prevent their broader application. Compact, miniature, or even portable MS with reduced size and requirements for vacuum and electronic systems is more favorable. Efforts on miniature MS have been made for a long time, beginning in the 1970s, and advancements in these technologies have continued, with many new mini MS being commercialized [172]. Studies have mainly focused on small molecules, with some pioneering studies on proteins and peptides. Zhai et al. demonstrated direct analysis of pure peptides and proteins using laser spray ionization miniature MS [173]. Chiang et al. detected peptides from the MET protein in a complex SKBR3 cell lysate after immunoaffinity enrichment of the MET peptides using a miniature MS named Mini β (PURSPEC Technologies, Beijing, China) equipped with a discontinuous atmospheric pressure interface (DAPI), a pulsed nanoESI source, and dual linear ion traps [174]. Future miniature MS may act like and replace the western blot imager as an easy benchtop, daily-use protein characterization method.

4.3 Increased Demand for Research Collaboration

Current clinical laboratory test research mainly involves collaborations between doctors using blood sample resources and researchers using facility resources. Research centers or scientific service companies house good scientific instruments, researchers, and technicians. Therefore, research on bioliquid specimens is largely dependent on who is known in the clinic. It would be significantly helpful if a nationwide medical association could develop a list of clinical diagnostic questions according to needs and urgency, as well as organize blood collection from different medical centers. Currently, some large hospitals with sufficient funding have established facility cores and have recruited researchers specializing in proteomics and data processing. However, to date, most clinical researchers do not have a core proteomics facility in their workplace. It would be helpful for core facilities in the nation to have an organization to share information on the capability and availability of their instruments. The Core Technologies for Life Sciences (CTLS), founded in Europe, and the Association of Biomolecular Resource Facilities (ABRF), founded in the US, are organizations that bring together scientists, technical staff, and administrative staff working in shared resource laboratories. It would be interesting and beneficial to establish a similar association in China.

CONCLUSION

MS is a powerful and valuable technique for measuring plasma and serum proteins and their PTMs. Targeted MS combined with immunoaffinity enrichment provides a highly specific and sensitive method for the development of clinical blood tests. Total proteome, protein PTMs, and EVs in the plasma/serum are different analytes for blood proteomics studies using different sample preparation methods. It would be helpful if all the sample preparation steps could be incorporated into one platform and automated. High-resolution, high mass accuracy LC-MS/MS has become increasingly important in clinical applications. For biomarker discovery research, sophisticated MS is needed, whereas, for assay development, small, robust MS at low cost has advantages. A robust and comprehensive pipeline for biomarker discovery, validation, and assay development, especially for various protein targets in the plasma/serum, will greatly help in the emergence of new blood tests, which will ultimately help realize precision and personalized medicine. With increasingly broad collaboration between people in clinical settings and MS cores, together with the advancements in these technologies, new blood protein tests are expected to develop rapidly in the near future.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors thank Shen Luan, the senior director of clinical innovation at Thermo Fisher Scientific (MA, USA), for his expert perspectives on clinical blood proteomics. The authors are also grateful to Nan Wang and Huiqi Li from Fynn Biotechnology (Shandong, China) for their support on the work including editing graphs.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

MS Mass Spectrometry

MS Mass Spectrometer

CTC Circulating Tissue Cells

HSA Human Serum Albumin

ASAT Aspartate Aminotransferase

ALAT Alanine Aminotransferase

HbA1c Glycated Hemoglobin

AFP-L3 Core-fucosylated Α-fetoprotein

ELISA Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assays

PEA Proximity Extension Assay

RPPA Reverse Phase Protein Array

SIMOA Single-molecule Array

xMAP Multi-analyte Profiling

PE Phycoerythrin

PTMs Post-translational Modifications

MALDI Matrix-assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization

ESI Electrospray Ionization

SELDI Surface-enhanced Laser Desorption/Ionization

FDA Food and Drug Administration

TOF Time-of-Flight

Q Quadruple

AI Artificial Intelligence

MS/MS Tandem Mass Spectrometry

DIA Data-independent Acquisition

DDA Data-dependent Acquisition

TMT Tandem Mass Tag

FAIMS Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry

TIMS Trapped Ion Mobility Spectrometry

MRM Multiple Reaction Monitoring

QqQ Triple Quadrupole

PRM Parallel Reaction Monitoring

SISCAPA Stable Isotope Standards and Capture by Anti-Peptide Antibodies

SIL Stable Isotope-labeled Peptides

m/z Mass-to-Charge Ratios

RT Retention Times

FDR False Discovery Rate

ROC Receiver Operating Characteristic

AGEs Advanced Glycation End-products

CML N-carboxymethyl-lysine

CEL N-carboxyethyl-lysine

Glc Glucose

Gal Galactose

Man Mannose

Hex Hexoses

GlcNAc N-acetylglucosamine

GalNAc N-acetylgalactosamine

HexNAc N-acetylhexosamines

CID Collision-induced Dissociation

HCD High-energy Collision-induced Dissociation

ETD Electrotransfer Dissociation

ConA Concanavalin A

WGA Wheat Germ Agglutinin

IMAC Immobilized Metal Affinity Chromatography

HILIC Hydrophilic Interaction Chromatography

AEC Anion-exchange Chromatography

ERLIC Electrostatic Repulsion–hydrophilic Interaction Chromatography

SPE Solid-phase Extraction

Aβ Amyloid-Β

APP Aβ Precursor Protein

EVs Extracellular Vesicles

MVBs Multivesicular Bodies

TEM Transmission Electron Microscopy

GPI Glycosylphosphatidylinositol

TEX Tumor Cell-derived Exosomes

CTLS Core Technologies for Life Sciences

ABRF Association of Biomolecular Resource Facilities

CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION

Not applicable.

FUNDING

None.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The authors declare no conflict of interest, financial or otherwise.

Figure 1 Schematic diagram of different affinity-based proteomic technologies.

Figure 2 Schematic diagram of bottom-up MS-based proteomics.

Figure 3 Analytes (total proteomes, PTMs, and EVs) in blood and their corresponding enrichment methods.

Figure 4 Cleavage sites of Aβ peptides.
==== Refs
REFERENCES

1 Cristofanilli M. Hayes D.F. Budd G.T. Ellis M.J. Stopeck A. Reuben J.M. Doyle G.V. Matera J. Allard W.J. Miller M.C. Fritsche H.A. Hortobagyi G.N. Terstappen L.W.M.M. Circulating tumor cells: A novel prognostic factor for newly diagnosed metastatic breast cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 2005 23 7 1420 1430 10.1200/JCO.2005.08.140 15735118
2 De Bono J.S. Scher H.I. Montgomery R.B. Parker C. Miller M.C. Tissing H. Doyle G.V. Terstappen L.W.W.M. Pienta K.J. Raghavan D. Circulating tumor cells predict survival benefit from treatment in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 2008 14 19 6302 6309 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0872 18829513
3 Cohen S.J. Punt C.J.A. Iannotti N. Saidman B.H. Sabbath K.D. Gabrail N.Y. Picus J. Morse M.A. Mitchell E. Miller M.C. Doyle G.V. Tissing H. Terstappen L.W.M.M. Meropol N.J. Prognostic significance of circulating tumor cells in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Ann. Oncol. 2009 20 7 1223 1229 10.1093/annonc/mdn786 19282466
4 Buchholz M. Circulating RNAs in medical diagnostics and as disease-relevant biomarkers. Pharmazie 2016 71 1 17 20 26867348
5 Hamam R. Hamam D. Alsaleh K.A. Kassem M. Zaher W. Alfayez M. Aldahmash A. Alajez N.M. Circulating microRNAs in breast cancer: novel diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers. Cell Death Dis. 2017 8 9 e3045 10.1038/cddis.2017.440 28880270
6 Gahan P. Circulating nucleic acids in plasma and serum: Applications in diagnostic techniques for noninvasive prenatal diagnosis. Int. J. Womens Health 2013 5 177 186 10.2147/IJWH.S34442 23637563
7 Dennis Lo Y.M. Chiu R.W.K. Prenatal diagnosis: Progress through plasma nucleic acids. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2007 8 1 71 77 10.1038/nrg1982 17146468
8 Tounta G. Kolialexi A. Papantoniou N. Tsangaris G.T. Kanavakis E. Mavrou A. Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis using cell-free fetal nucleic acids in maternal plasma: Progress overview beyond predictive and personalized diagnosis. EPMA J. 2011 2 2 163 171 10.1007/s13167-011-0085-y 23199146
9 Qiu S. Cai Y. Yao H. Lin C. Xie Y. Tang S. Zhang A. Small molecule metabolites: Discovery of biomarkers and therapeutic targets. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 2023 8 1 132 10.1038/s41392-023-01399-3 36941259
10 Anderson N.L. Anderson N.G. The human plasma proteome: History, character, and diagnostic prospects. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2002 1 11 845 867 10.1074/mcp.R200007-MCP200 12488461
11 Geyer P.E. Holdt L.M. Teupser D. Mann M. Revisiting biomarker discovery by plasma proteomics. Mol. Syst. Biol. 2017 13 9 942 10.15252/msb.20156297 28951502
12 Peiris A.N. Medlock D. Gavin M. Thyroglobulin for monitoring for thyroid cancer recurrence. JAMA 2019 321 12 1228 10.1001/jama.2019.0803 30912839
13 De Ritis F. Coltorti M. Giusti G. An enzymic test for the diagnosis of viral hepatitis: The transaminase serum activities. Clin. Chim. Acta 1957 2 1 70 74 10.1016/0009-8981(57)90027-X 13447217
14 Levine R.J. Maynard S.E. Qian C. Lim K.H. England L.J. Yu K.F. Schisterman E.F. Thadhani R. Sachs B.P. Epstein F.H. Sibai B.M. Sukhatme V.P. Karumanchi S.A. Circulating angiogenic factors and the risk of preeclampsia. N. Engl. J. Med. 2004 350 7 672 683 10.1056/NEJMoa031884 14764923
15 Omenn G.S. The human proteome organization plasma proteome project pilot phase: Reference specimens, technology platform comparisons, and standardized data submissions and analyses. Proteomics 2004 4 5 1235 1240 10.1002/pmic.200300686 15188391
16 Omenn G.S. THE HUPO human plasma proteome project. Proteomics Clin. Appl. 2007 1 8 769 779 10.1002/prca.200700369 21136733
17 Omenn G.S. States D.J. Adamski M. Blackwell T.W. Menon R. Hermjakob H. Apweiler R. Haab B.B. Simpson R.J. Eddes J.S. Kapp E.A. Moritz R.L. Chan D.W. Rai A.J. Admon A. Aebersold R. Eng J. Hancock W.S. Hefta S.A. Meyer H. Paik Y.K. Yoo J.S. Ping P. Pounds J. Adkins J. Qian X. Wang R. Wasinger V. Wu C.Y. Zhao X. Zeng R. Archakov A. Tsugita A. Beer I. Pandey A. Pisano M. Andrews P. Tammen H. Speicher D.W. Hanash S.M. Overview of the HUPO plasma proteome project: results from the pilot phase with 35 collaborating laboratories and multiple analytical groups, generating a core dataset of 3020 proteins and a publicly‐available database. Proteomics 2005 5 13 3226 3245 10.1002/pmic.200500358 16104056
18 Zimmerman L.J. Global stability of plasma proteomes for mass spectrometry-based analyses. Mol Cell Proteomics 2012 11 6 M111 014340 10.1074/mcp.M111.014340
19 Mateos J. Carneiro I. Corrales F. Elortza F. Paradela A. del Pino M.S. Iloro I. Marcilla M. Mora M.I. Valero L. Ciordia S. Fernández V. Fortuño M.A. García-Sánchez I. Martínez R. Muñoz M.A. Rodriguez C. Doménech N. Multicentric study of the effect of pre-analytical variables in the quality of plasma samples stored in biobanks using different complementary proteomic methods. J. Proteomics 2017 150 109 120 10.1016/j.jprot.2016.09.003 27620695
20 Percy A.J. Parker C.E. Borchers C.H. Pre-analytical and analytical variability in absolute quantitative MRM-based plasma proteomic studies. Bioanalysis 2013 5 22 2837 2856 10.4155/bio.13.245 24256362
21 Anderson N.L. Ptolemy A.S. Rifai N. The riddle of protein diagnostics: Future bleak or bright? Clin. Chem. 2013 59 1 194 197 10.1373/clinchem.2012.184705 23150058
22 Littlejohns T.J. Holliday J. Gibson L.M. Garratt S. Oesingmann N. Alfaro-Almagro F. Bell J.D. Boultwood C. Collins R. Conroy M.C. Crabtree N. Doherty N. Frangi A.F. Harvey N.C. Leeson P. Miller K.L. Neubauer S. Petersen S.E. Sellors J. Sheard S. Smith S.M. Sudlow C.L.M. Matthews P.M. Allen N.E. The UK Biobank imaging enhancement of 100,000 participants: Rationale, data collection, management and future directions. Nat. Commun. 2020 11 1 2624 10.1038/s41467-020-15948-9 32457287
23 Conroy M.C. Lacey B. Bešević J.; Omiyale, W.; Feng, Q.; Effingham, M.; Sellers, J.; Sheard, S.; Pancholi, M.; Gregory, G.; Busby, J.; Collins, R.; Allen, N.E. UK Biobank: A globally important resource for cancer research. Br. J. Cancer 2023 128 4 519 527 10.1038/s41416-022-02053-5 36402876
24 Geyer P.E. Voytik E. Treit P.V. Doll S. Kleinhempel A. Niu L. Müller J.B. Buchholtz M.L. Bader J.M. Teupser D. Holdt L.M. Mann M. Plasma proteome profiling to detect and avoid sample‐related biases in biomarker studies. EMBO Mol. Med. 2019 11 11 e10427 10.15252/emmm.201910427 31566909
25 Köhler S. Gargano M. Matentzoglu N. Carmody L.C. Lewis-Smith D. Vasilevsky N.A. Danis D. Balagura G. Baynam G. Brower A.M. Callahan T.J. Chute C.G. Est J.L. Galer P.D. Ganesan S. Griese M. Haimel M. Pazmandi J. Hanauer M. Harris N.L. Hartnett M.J. Hastreiter M. Hauck F. He Y. Jeske T. Kearney H. Kindle G. Klein C. Knoflach K. Krause R. Lagorce D. McMurry J.A. Miller J.A. Munoz-Torres M.C. Peters R.L. Rapp C.K. Rath A.M. Rind S.A. Rosenberg A.Z. Segal M.M. Seidel M.G. Smedley D. Talmy T. Thomas Y. Wiafe S.A. Xian J. Yüksel Z. Helbig I. Mungall C.J. Haendel M.A. Robinson P.N. The human phenotype ontology in 2021. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021 49 D1 D1207 D1217 10.1093/nar/gkaa1043 33264411
26 Assarsson E. Lundberg M. Holmquist G. Björkesten J. Bucht Thorsen S. Ekman D. Eriksson A. Rennel Dickens E. Ohlsson S. Edfeldt G. Andersson A.C. Lindstedt P. Stenvang J. Gullberg M. Fredriksson S. Homogenous 96-plex PEA immunoassay exhibiting high sensitivity, specificity, and excellent scalability. PLoS One 2014 9 4 e95192 10.1371/journal.pone.0095192 24755770
27 Petricoin E. III Wulfkuhle J. Howard M. Pierobon M. Espina V. Luchini A. Liotta L.A. RPPA: Origins, transition to a validated clinical research tool, and next generations of the technology. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2019 1188 1 19 10.1007/978-981-32-9755-5_1 31820380
28 Chang L. Rissin D.M. Fournier D.R. Piech T. Patel P.P. Wilson D.H. Duffy D.C. Single molecule enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays: Theoretical considerations. J. Immunol. Methods 2012 378 1-2 102 115 10.1016/j.jim.2012.02.011 22370429
29 Fulton R.J. McDade R.L. Smith P.L. Kienker L.J. Kettman J.R. Jr Advanced multiplexed analysis with the FlowMetrixTM system. Clin. Chem. 1997 43 9 1749 1756 10.1093/clinchem/43.9.1749 9299971
30 Gold L. Ayers D. Bertino J. Bock C. Bock A. Brody E.N. Carter J. Dalby A.B. Eaton B.E. Fitzwater T. Flather D. Forbes A. Foreman T. Fowler C. Gawande B. Goss M. Gunn M. Gupta S. Halladay D. Heil J. Heilig J. Hicke B. Husar G. Janjic N. Jarvis T. Jennings S. Katilius E. Keeney T.R. Kim N. Koch T.H. Kraemer S. Kroiss L. Le N. Levine D. Lindsey W. Lollo B. Mayfield W. Mehan M. Mehler R. Nelson S.K. Nelson M. Nieuwlandt D. Nikrad M. Ochsner U. Ostroff R.M. Otis M. Parker T. Pietrasiewicz S. Resnicow D.I. Rohloff J. Sanders G. Sattin S. Schneider D. Singer B. Stanton M. Sterkel A. Stewart A. Stratford S. Vaught J.D. Vrkljan M. Walker J.J. Watrobka M. Waugh S. Weiss A. Wilcox S.K. Wolfson A. Wolk S.K. Zhang C. Zichi D. Aptamer-based multiplexed proteomic technology for biomarker discovery. PLoS One 2010 5 12 e15004 10.1371/journal.pone.0015004 21165148
31 Ding Z. Wang N. Ji N. Chen Z.S. Proteomics technologies for cancer liquid biopsies. Mol. Cancer 2022 21 1 53 10.1186/s12943-022-01526-8 35168611
32 Suhre K. McCarthy M.I. Schwenk J.M. Genetics meets proteomics: Perspectives for large population-based studies. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2021 22 1 19 37 10.1038/s41576-020-0268-2 32860016
33 Fredolini C. Byström S. Pin E. Edfors F. Tamburro D. Iglesias M.J. Häggmark A. Hong M.G. Uhlen M. Nilsson P. Schwenk J.M. Immunocapture strategies in translational proteomics. Expert Rev. Proteomics 2016 13 1 83 98 10.1586/14789450.2016.1111141 26558424
34 Rai A.J. Zhang Z. Rosenzweig J. Shih I. Pham T. Fung E.T. Sokoll L.J. Chan D.W. Proteomic approaches to tumor marker discovery. Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 2002 126 12 1518 1526 10.5858/2002-126-1518-PATTMD 12456215
35 Zhang Z. Bast R.C. Jr Yu Y. Li J. Sokoll L.J. Rai A.J. Rosenzweig J.M. Cameron B. Wang Y.Y. Meng X.Y. Berchuck A. van Haaften-Day C. Hacker N.F. de Bruijn H.W.A. van der Zee A.G.J. Jacobs I.J. Fung E.T. Chan D.W. Three biomarkers identified from serum proteomic analysis for the detection of early stage ovarian cancer. Cancer Res. 2004 64 16 5882 5890 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-0746 15313933
36 Stewart H.I. Grinfeld D. Giannakopulos A. Petzoldt J. Shanley T. Garland M. Denisov E. Peterson A.C. Damoc E. Zeller M. Arrey T.N. Pashkova A. Renuse S. Hakimi A. Kühn A. Biel M. Kreutzmann A. Hagedorn B. Colonius I. Schütz A. Stefes A. Dwivedi A. Mourad D. Hoek M. Reitemeier B. Cochems P. Kholomeev A. Ostermann R. Quiring G. Ochmann M. Möhring S. Wagner A. Petker A. Kanngiesser S. Wiedemeyer M. Balschun W. Hermanson D. Zabrouskov V. Makarov A.A. Hock C. Parallelized acquisition of orbitrap and astral analyzers enables high-throughput quantitative analysis. Anal. Chem. 2023 95 42 15656 15664 10.1021/acs.analchem.3c02856 37815927
37 Conza J.A.D. Applications of MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry in clinical microbiology. Rev. Argent. Microbiol. 2022 54 3 163 165 10.1016/j.ram.2022.08.001 36184187
38 Elbehiry A. Aldubaib M. Abalkhail A. Marzouk E. ALbeloushi, A.; Moussa, I.; Ibrahem, M.; Albazie, H.; Alqarni, A.; Anagreyyah, S.; Alghamdi, S.; Rawway, M. How MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry technology contributes to microbial infection control in healthcare settings. Vaccines (Basel) 2022 10 11 1881 10.3390/vaccines10111881 36366389
39 Iles R.K. A how to guide: Clinical population test development and authorization of MALDI-ToF mass spectrometry-based screening tests for viral infections. Viruses 2022 14 9 1958 36146765
40 Tsuchida S. Nakayama T. MALDI-based mass spectrometry in clinical testing: Focus on bacterial identification. Appl. Sci. 2022 12 6 2814
41 Do T. Guran R. Adam V. Zitka O. Use of MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry for virus identification: A review. Analyst (Lond.) 2022 147 14 3131 3154 10.1039/D2AN00431C 35713185
42 Weis C. Cuénod A. Rieck B. Dubuis O. Graf S. Lang C. Oberle M. Brackmann M. Søgaard K.K. Osthoff M. Borgwardt K. Egli A. Direct antimicrobial resistance prediction from clinical MALDI-TOF mass spectra using machine learning. Nat. Med. 2022 28 1 164 174 10.1038/s41591-021-01619-9 35013613
43 Zubair F. MALDI mass Spectrometry based proteomics for drug discovery & development. Drug Discov. Today. Technol. 2021 40 29 35 10.1016/j.ddtec.2021.09.002 34916018
44 Richards A.L. Hebert A.S. Ulbrich A. Bailey D.J. Coughlin E.E. Westphall M.S. Coon J.J. One-hour proteome analysis in yeast. Nat. Protoc. 2015 10 5 701 714 10.1038/nprot.2015.040 25855955
45 Li J. Cai Z. Bomgarden R.D. Pike I. Kuhn K. Rogers J.C. Roberts T.M. Gygi S.P. Paulo J.A. TMTpro-18plex: The expanded and complete set of TMTpro reagents for sample multiplexing. J. Proteome Res. 2021 20 5 2964 2972 10.1021/acs.jproteome.1c00168 33900084
46 Rosting C. Yu J. Cooper H.J. High field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry in nontargeted bottom-up proteomics of dried blood spots. J. Proteome Res. 2018 17 6 1997 2004 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00746 29707944
47 Assis D. Yellow fever blood proteomics study by trapped ion mobility mass spectrometry. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2022 21 8 S61 S61
48 Cooper H.J. To what extent is FAIMS beneficial in the analysis of proteins? J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 2016 27 4 566 577 10.1007/s13361-015-1326-4 26843211
49 Michelmann K. Silveira J.A. Ridgeway M.E. Park M.A. Fundamentals of trapped ion mobility spectrometry. J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 2015 26 1 14 24 10.1007/s13361-014-0999-4 25331153
50 Macklin A. Khan S. Kislinger T. Recent advances in mass spectrometry based clinical proteomics: Applications to cancer research. Clin. Proteomics 2020 17 1 17 10.1186/s12014-020-09283-w 32489335
51 Meier F. Park M.A. Mann M. Trapped ion mobility spectrometry and parallel accumulation–serial fragmentation in proteomics. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2021 20 100138 10.1016/j.mcpro.2021.100138 34416385
52 Method of the Year 2012. Nat. Methods 2013 10 1 1 10.1038/nmeth.2329 23547284
53 Erickson B.K. Rose C.M. Braun C.R. Erickson A.R. Knott J. McAlister G.C. Wühr M. Paulo J.A. Everley R.A. Gygi S.P. A Strategy to combine sample multiplexing with targeted proteomics assays for high-throughput protein signature characterization. Mol. Cell 2017 65 2 361 370 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.12.005 28065596
54 Grossegesse M. Hartkopf F. Nitsche A. Doellinger J. Stable isotope-triggered offset fragmentation allows massively multiplexed target profiling on quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometers. J. Proteome Res. 2020 19 7 2854 2862 10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c00065 32369372
55 Stopfer L.E. Flower C.T. Gajadhar A.S. Patel B. Gallien S. Lopez-Ferrer D. White F.M. High-density, targeted monitoring of tyrosine phosphorylation reveals activated signaling networks in human tumors. Cancer Res. 2021 81 9 2495 2509 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-20-3804 33509940
56 Kushnir M.M. Rockwood A.L. Roberts W.L. Abraham D. Hoofnagle A.N. Meikle A.W. Measurement of thyroglobulin by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry in serum and plasma in the presence of antithyroglobulin autoantibodies. Clin. Chem. 2013 59 6 982 990 10.1373/clinchem.2012.195594 23396140
57 Razavi M. Johnson L.D.S. Lum J.J. Kruppa G. Anderson N.L. Pearson T.W. Quantification of a proteotypic peptide from protein C inhibitor by liquid chromatography-free SISCAPA-MALDI mass spectrometry: Application to identification of recurrence of prostate cancer. Clin. Chem. 2013 59 10 1514 1522 10.1373/clinchem.2012.199786 23857672
58 Razavi M. Frick L.E. LaMarr W.A. Pope M.E. Miller C.A. Anderson N.L. Pearson T.W. High-throughput SISCAPA quantitation of peptides from human plasma digests by ultrafast, liquid chromatography-free mass spectrometry. J. Proteome Res. 2012 11 12 5642 5649 10.1021/pr300652v 23126378
59 Liu C. Zhao Z. Fan J. Lyon C.J. Wu H.J. Nedelkov D. Zelazny A.M. Olivier K.N. Cazares L.H. Holland S.M. Graviss E.A. Hu Y. Quantification of circulating Mycobacterium tuberculosis antigen peptides allows rapid diagnosis of active disease and treatment monitoring. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2017 114 15 3969 3974 10.1073/pnas.1621360114 28348223
60 Lingxiao S. Jinfei M. Qingqing Y. Pengyun L. Huafen L. The application of certified reference materials for clinical mass spectrometry. J. Clin. Lab. Anal. 2022 36 4 e24301 10.1002/jcla.24301 35274770
61 Shih H.C. Chang M.C. Chen C.H. Tsai I.L. Wang S.Y. Kuo Y.P. Chen C.H. Chang Y.T. High accuracy differentiating autoimmune pancreatitis from pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma by immunoglobulin G glycosylation. Clin. Proteomics 2019 16 1 1 10.1186/s12014-018-9221-1 30622446
62 Shiao J.Y. Chang Y.T. Chang M.C. Chen M.X. Liu L.W. Wang X.Y. Tsai Y.J. Kuo T.C. Tsai I.L. Development of efficient on-bead protein elution process coupled to ultra-high performance liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry to determine immunoglobulin G subclass and glycosylation for discovery of bio-signatures in pancreatic disease. J. Chromatogr. A 2020 1621 461039 10.1016/j.chroma.2020.461039 32295703
63 Kirkpatrick D.S. Gerber S.A. Gygi S.P. The absolute quantification strategy: A general procedure for the quantification of proteins and post-translational modifications. Methods 2005 35 3 265 273 10.1016/j.ymeth.2004.08.018 15722223
64 Dupuis N. Muller S. Treiber T. Escher C. Evaluation of PQ500, a 500-plasma protein blood panel in NSCLC subjects using high-throughput MRM mass spectrometry. J. Clin. Oncol. 2019 37 8_suppl 110 10.1200/JCO.2019.37.8_suppl.110
65 Demichev V. Messner C.B. Vernardis S.I. Lilley K.S. Ralser M. DIA-NN: Neural networks and interference correction enable deep proteome coverage in high throughput. Nat. Methods 2020 17 1 41 44 10.1038/s41592-019-0638-x 31768060
66 Kawahara R. Chernykh A. Alagesan K. Bern M. Cao W. Chalkley R.J. Cheng K. Choo M.S. Edwards N. Goldman R. Hoffmann M. Hu Y. Huang Y. Kim J.Y. Kletter D. Liquet B. Liu M. Mechref Y. Meng B. Neelamegham S. Nguyen-Khuong T. Nilsson J. Pap A. Park G.W. Parker B.L. Pegg C.L. Penninger J.M. Phung T.K. Pioch M. Rapp E. Sakalli E. Sanda M. Schulz B.L. Scott N.E. Sofronov G. Stadlmann J. Vakhrushev S.Y. Woo C.M. Wu H.Y. Yang P. Ying W. Zhang H. Zhang Y. Zhao J. Zaia J. Haslam S.M. Palmisano G. Yoo J.S. Larson G. Khoo K.H. Medzihradszky K.F. Kolarich D. Packer N.H. Thaysen-Andersen M. Community evaluation of glycoproteomics informatics solutions reveals high-performance search strategies for serum glycopeptide analysis. Nat. Methods 2021 18 11 1304 1316 10.1038/s41592-021-01309-x 34725484
67 Chalkley R.J. Baker P.R. Huang L. Hansen K.C. Allen N.P. Rexach M. Burlingame A.L. Comprehensive analysis of a multidimensional liquid chromatography mass spectrometry dataset acquired on a quadrupole selecting, quadrupole collision cell, time-of-flight mass spectrometer: II. New developments in Protein Prospector allow for reliable and comprehensive automatic analysis of large datasets. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2005 4 8 1194 1204 10.1074/mcp.D500002-MCP200 15937296
68 Bern M. Kil Y.J. Becker C. Byonic: advanced peptide and protein identification software. Curr. Protoc. Bioinformatics 2012
69 Liu M.Q. Zeng W.F. Fang P. Cao W.Q. Liu C. Yan G.Q. Zhang Y. Peng C. Wu J.Q. Zhang X.J. Tu H.J. Chi H. Sun R.X. Cao Y. Dong M.Q. Jiang B.Y. Huang J.M. Shen H.L. Wong C.C.L. He S.M. Yang P.Y. pGlyco 2.0 enables precision N-glycoproteomics with comprehensive quality control and one-step mass spectrometry for intact glycopeptide identification. Nat. Commun. 2017 8 1 438 10.1038/s41467-017-00535-2 28874712
70 Zeng W.F. Liu M.Q. Zhang Y. Wu J.Q. Fang P. Peng C. Nie A. Yan G. Cao W. Liu C. Chi H. Sun R.X. Wong C.C.L. He S.M. Yang P. pGlyco: A pipeline for the identification of intact N-glycopeptides by using HCD- and CID-MS/MS and MS3. Sci. Rep. 2016 6 1 25102 10.1038/srep25102 27139140
71 Delafield D.G. Li L. Recent advances in analytical approaches for glycan and glycopeptide quantitation. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2021 20 100054 10.1074/mcp.R120.002095 32576592
72 Wu Z. Serie D. Xu G. Zou J. PB-Net: Automatic peak integration by sequential deep learning for multiple reaction monitoring. J. Proteomics 2020 223 103820 10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103820 32416316
73 Mann M. Kumar C. Zeng W.F. Strauss M.T. Artificial intelligence for proteomics and biomarker discovery. Cell Syst. 2021 12 8 759 770 10.1016/j.cels.2021.06.006 34411543
74 Blumenscheit C. Pfeifer Y. Werner G. John C. Schneider A. Lasch P. Doellinger J. Unbiased antimicrobial resistance detection from clinical bacterial isolates using proteomics. Anal. Chem. 2021 93 44 14599 14608 10.1021/acs.analchem.1c00594 34697938
75 Nanjappa V. Thomas J.K. Marimuthu A. Muthusamy B. Radhakrishnan A. Sharma R. Ahmad Khan A. Balakrishnan L. Sahasrabuddhe N.A. Kumar S. Jhaveri B.N. Sheth K.V. Kumar Khatana R. Shaw P.G. Srikanth S.M. Mathur P.P. Shankar S. Nagaraja D. Christopher R. Mathivanan S. Raju R. Sirdeshmukh R. Chatterjee A. Simpson R.J. Harsha H.C. Pandey A. Prasad T.S.K. Plasma proteome database as a resource for proteomics research: 2014 update. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 42 D1 D959 D965 10.1093/nar/gkt1251 24304897
76 Ribeiro L.F. Urban J. Recent stationary phase-based fractionation strategies in proteomic analysis. J. Sep. Sci. 2023 2023 e2300174
77 Dey K.K. Wang H. Niu M. Bai B. Wang X. Li Y. Cho J.H. Tan H. Mishra A. High A.A. Chen P.C. Wu Z. Beach T.G. Peng J. Deep undepleted human serum proteome profiling toward biomarker discovery for Alzheimer’s disease. Clin. Proteomics 2019 16 1 16 10.1186/s12014-019-9237-1 31019427
78 Shi T. Zhou J.Y. Gritsenko M.A. Hossain M. Camp D.G. II Smith R.D. Qian W.J. IgY14 and SuperMix immunoaffinity separations coupled with liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry for human plasma proteomics biomarker discovery. Methods 2012 56 2 246 253 10.1016/j.ymeth.2011.09.001 21925605
79 Qian W.J. Kaleta D.T. Petritis B.O. Jiang H. Liu T. Zhang X. Mottaz H.M. Varnum S.M. Camp D.G. II Huang L. Fang X. Zhang W.W. Smith R.D. Enhanced detection of low abundance human plasma proteins using a tandem IgY12-SuperMix immunoaffinity separation strategy. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2008 7 10 1963 1973 10.1074/mcp.M800008-MCP200 18632595
80 Tu C. Rudnick P.A. Martinez M.Y. Cheek K.L. Stein S.E. Slebos R.J.C. Liebler D.C. Depletion of abundant plasma proteins and limitations of plasma proteomics. J. Proteome Res. 2010 9 10 4982 4991 10.1021/pr100646w 20677825
81 Bellei E. Bergamini S. Monari E. Fantoni L.I. Cuoghi A. Ozben T. Tomasi A. High-abundance proteins depletion for serum proteomic analysis: Concomitant removal of non-targeted proteins. Amino Acids 2011 40 1 145 156 10.1007/s00726-010-0628-x 20495836
82 Keshishian H. Burgess M.W. Gillette M.A. Mertins P. Clauser K.R. Mani D.R. Kuhn E.W. Farrell L.A. Gerszten R.E. Carr S.A. Multiplexed, quantitative workflow for sensitive biomarker discovery in plasma yields novel candidates for early myocardial injury. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2015 14 9 2375 2393 10.1074/mcp.M114.046813 25724909
83 Ferdosi S. Tangeysh B. Brown T.R. Everley P.A. Figa M. McLean M. Elgierari E.M. Zhao X. Garcia V.J. Wang T. Chang M.E.K. Riedesel K. Chu J. Mahoney M. Xia H. O’Brien E.S. Stolarczyk C. Harris D. Platt T.L. Ma P. Goldberg M. Langer R. Flory M.R. Benz R. Tao W. Cuevas J.C. Batzoglou S. Blume J.E. Siddiqui A. Hornburg D. Farokhzad O.C. Engineered nanoparticles enable deep proteomics studies at scale by leveraging tunable nano–bio interactions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2022 119 11 e2106053119 10.1073/pnas.2106053119 35275789
84 Blume J.E. Manning W.C. Troiano G. Hornburg D. Figa M. Hesterberg L. Platt T.L. Zhao X. Cuaresma R.A. Everley P.A. Ko M. Liou H. Mahoney M. Ferdosi S. Elgierari E.M. Stolarczyk C. Tangeysh B. Xia H. Benz R. Siddiqui A. Carr S.A. Ma P. Langer R. Farias V. Farokhzad O.C. Rapid, deep and precise profiling of the plasma proteome with multi-nanoparticle protein corona. Nat. Commun. 2020 11 1 3662 10.1038/s41467-020-17033-7 32699280
85 Docter D. Distler U. Storck W. Kuharev J. Wünsch D. Hahlbrock A. Knauer S.K. Tenzer S. Stauber R.H. Quantitative profiling of the protein coronas that form around nanoparticles. Nat. Protoc. 2014 9 9 2030 2044 10.1038/nprot.2014.139 25079427
86 Perrone A. Giovino A. Benny J. Martinelli F. Advanced glycation end products (AGEs): Biochemistry, signaling, analytical methods, and epigenetic effects. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2020 2020 1 18 10.1155/2020/3818196 32256950
87 Suzuki A. Yabu A. Nakamura H. Advanced glycation end products in musculoskeletal system and disorders. Methods 2022 203 179 186 10.1016/j.ymeth.2020.09.012 32987130
88 Singh S. Siva B.V. Ravichandiran V. Advanced glycation end products: key player of the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Glycoconj. J. 2022 39 4 547 563 10.1007/s10719-022-10063-x 35579827
89 Li W.Y. Lee C.Y. Lee K.M. Zhang G. Lyu A. Yue K.K.M. Advanced glycation end-product precursor methylglyoxal may lead to development of alzheimer’s disease. Diabetes Metab. Syndr. Obes. 2022 15 3153 3166 10.2147/DMSO.S382927 36262805
90 Khalid M. Petroianu G. Adem A. Advanced glycation end products and diabetes mellitus: Mechanisms and perspectives. Biomolecules 2022 12 4 542 10.3390/biom12040542 35454131
91 Zhang W. Zhao T. Zhao Y. Gui D. Xu Y. Advanced glycation end products in chinese medicine mediated aging diseases: A review. Curr. Vasc. Pharmacol. 2020 18 4 322 333 10.2174/1570161117666190507112157 31060489
92 Jagadeeshaprasad M.G. Batkulwar K.B. Meshram N.N. Tiwari S. Korwar A.M. Unnikrishnan A.G. Kulkarni M.J. Targeted quantification of N-1-(carboxymethyl) valine and N-1-(carboxyethyl) valine peptides of β-hemoglobin for better diagnostics in diabetes. Clin. Proteomics 2016 13 1 7 10.1186/s12014-016-9108-y 27030792
93 Dang L. Jia L. Zhi Y. Li P. Zhao T. Zhu B. Lan R. Hu Y. Zhang H. Sun S. Mapping human N-linked glycoproteins and glycosylation sites using mass spectrometry. Trends Analyt. Chem. 2019 114 143 150 10.1016/j.trac.2019.02.009 31831916
94 Sun S. Shah P. Eshghi S.T. Yang W. Trikannad N. Yang S. Chen L. Aiyetan P. Höti N. Zhang Z. Chan D.W. Zhang H. Comprehensive analysis of protein glycosylation by solid-phase extraction of N-linked glycans and glycosite-containing peptides. Nat. Biotechnol. 2016 34 1 84 88 10.1038/nbt.3403 26571101
95 Halim A. Westerlind U. Pett C. Schorlemer M. Rüetschi U. Brinkmalm G. Sihlbom C. Lengqvist J. Larson G. Nilsson J. Assignment of saccharide identities through analysis of oxonium ion fragmentation profiles in LC-MS/MS of glycopeptides. J. Proteome Res. 2014 13 12 6024 6032 10.1021/pr500898r 25358049
96 Ranzinger R. York W.S. Glycome D.B. Methods Mol. Biol. 2015 1273 109 124 10.1007/978-1-4939-2343-4_8 25753706
97 Ranzinger R. Herget S. von der Lieth C.W. Frank M. GlycomeDB--a unified database for carbohydrate structures. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 39 Database D373 D376 10.1093/nar/gkq1014 21045056
98 Suttapitugsakul S. Sun F. Wu R. Recent advances in glycoproteomic analysis by mass spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 2020 92 1 267 291 10.1021/acs.analchem.9b04651 31626732
99 Zhang H. Yi E.C. Li X. Mallick P. Kelly-Spratt K.S. Masselon C.D. Camp D.G. II Smith R.D. Kemp C.J. Aebersold R. High throughput quantitative analysis of serum proteins using glycopeptide capture and liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2005 4 2 144 155 10.1074/mcp.M400090-MCP200 15608340
100 Yang W. Ao M. Hu Y. Li Q.K. Zhang H. Mapping the O‐glycoproteome using site‐specific extraction of O‐linked glycopeptides (EXoO). Mol. Syst. Biol. 2018 14 11 e8486 10.15252/msb.20188486 30459171
101 Yang S. Onigman P. Wu W.W. Sjogren J. Nyhlen H. Shen R.F. Cipollo J. Deciphering protein O -glycosylation: Solid-phase chemoenzymatic cleavage and enrichment. Anal. Chem. 2018 90 13 8261 8269 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b01834 29936827
102 Chang T.T. Cheng J.H. Tsai H.W. Young K.C. Hsieh S.Y. Ho C.H. Plasma proteome plus site‐specific N ‐glycoprofiling for hepatobiliary carcinomas. J. Pathol. Clin. Res. 2019 5 3 199 212 10.1002/cjp2.136 31136099
103 Zhu J. Huang J. Zhang J. Chen Z. Lin Y. Grigorean G. Li L. Liu S. Singal A.G. Parikh N.D. Lubman D.M. Glycopeptide biomarkers in serum haptoglobin for hepatocellular carcinoma detection in patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. J. Proteome Res. 2020 19 8 3452 3466 10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c00270 32412768
104 Dalal K. Dalal B. Bhatia S. Shukla A. Shankarkumar A. Analysis of serum Haptoglobin using glycoproteomics and lectin immunoassay in liver diseases in Hepatitis B virus infection. Clin. Chim. Acta 2019 495 309 317 10.1016/j.cca.2019.04.072 31014754
105 Li Q. Kailemia M.J. Merleev A.A. Xu G. Serie D. Danan L.M. Haj F.G. Maverakis E. Lebrilla C.B. Site-specific glycosylation quantitation of 50 serum glycoproteins enhanced by predictive glycopeptidomics for improved disease biomarker discovery. Anal. Chem. 2019 91 8 5433 5445 10.1021/acs.analchem.9b00776 30882205
106 Darebna P. Novak P. Kucera R. Topolcan O. Sanda M. Goldman R. Pompach P. Changes in the expression of N- and O-glycopeptides in patients with colorectal cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma quantified by full-MS scan FT-ICR and multiple reaction monitoring. J. Proteomics 2017 153 44 52 10.1016/j.jprot.2016.09.004 27646713
107 Ramachandran P. Xu G. Huang H.H. Rice R. Zhou B. Lindpaintner K. Serie D. Serum Glycoprotein markers in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma. J. Proteome Res. 2022 21 4 1083 1094 10.1021/acs.jproteome.1c00965 35286803
108 Jeon J. Yang J. Park J.M. Han N.Y. Lee Y.B. Lee H. Development of an automated high-throughput sample preparation protocol for LC-MS/MS analysis of glycated peptides. J. Chromatogr. B Analyt. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 2018 1092 88 94 10.1016/j.jchromb.2018.05.036 29885514
109 Muralidharan M. Bhat V. Bindu Y.S. Mandal A.K. Glycation profile of minor abundant erythrocyte proteome across varying glycemic index in diabetes mellitus. Anal. Biochem. 2019 573 37 43 10.1016/j.ab.2019.02.026 30831097
110 Korwar A.M. Zhang Q. Comprehensive quantification of carboxymethyllysine-modified peptides in human plasma. J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 2021 32 3 744 752 10.1021/jasms.0c00443 33512994
111 Di Sanzo S. Spengler K. Leheis A. Kirkpatrick J.M. Rändler T.L. Baldensperger T. Dau T. Henning C. Parca L. Marx C. Wang Z.Q. Glomb M.A. Ori A. Heller R. Mapping protein carboxymethylation sites provides insights into their role in proteostasis and cell proliferation. Nat. Commun. 2021 12 1 6743 10.1038/s41467-021-26982-6 34795246
112 Riley N.M. Bertozzi C.R. Pitteri S.J. A pragmatic guide to enrichment strategies for mass spectrometry–based glycoproteomics. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2021 20 100029 10.1074/mcp.R120.002277 33583771
113 Yin H. Zhu J. Methods for quantification of glycopeptides by liquid separation and mass spectrometry. Mass Spectrom. Rev. 2023 42 2 887 917 10.1002/mas.21771 35099083
114 Wu C.C. Lu Y.T. Yeh T.S. Chan Y.H. Dash S. Yu J.S. Identification of fucosylated SERPINA1 as a novel plasma marker for pancreatic cancer using lectin affinity capture coupled with iTRAQ-based quantitative glycoproteomics. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 22 11 6079 10.3390/ijms22116079 34199928
115 Wang J. Wen H. Li M. Guo T. Chen C. N-glycoproteome reveals that N-glycosylation plays crucial roles in photosynthesis and carbon metabolism in young rice leaves. J. Plant Biol. 2020 63 3 165 175 10.1007/s12374-020-09243-9
116 Kobayashi Y. Tateno H. Ogawa H. Yamamoto K. Hirabayashi J. Comprehensive list of lectins: Origins, natures, and carbohydrate specificities. Methods Mol. Biol. 2014 1200 555 577 10.1007/978-1-4939-1292-6_45 25117264
117 Burt R.A. Dejanovic B. Peckham H.J. Lee K.A. Li X. Ounadjela J.R. Rao A. Malaker S.A. Carr S.A. Myers S.A. Novel antibodies for the simple and efficient enrichment of native O-GlcNAc modified peptides. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2021 20 100167 10.1016/j.mcpro.2021.100167 34678516
118 Cho K.C. Chen L. Hu Y. Schnaubelt M. Zhang H. Developing workflow for simultaneous analyses of phosphopeptides and glycopeptides. ACS Chem. Biol. 2019 14 1 58 66 10.1021/acschembio.8b00902 30525447
119 Hu Y. Shah P. Clark D.J. Ao M. Zhang H. Reanalysis of global proteomic and phosphoproteomic data identified a large number of glycopeptides. Anal. Chem. 2018 90 13 8065 8071 10.1021/acs.analchem.8b01137 29741879
120 Zhu J. Wang F. Cheng K. Dong J. Sun D. Chen R. Wang L. Ye M. Zou H. A simple integrated system for rapid analysis of sialic‐acid‐containingN ‐glycopeptides from human serum. Proteomics 2013 13 8 1306 1313 10.1002/pmic.201200367 23335361
121 Yi L. Shao Y. Fu M. Yan Y. Ding C.F. Tang K. One-step preparation of magnetic zwitterionic–hydrophilic dual functional nanospheres for in-depth glycopeptides analysis in Alzheimer’s disease patients’ serum. J. Chromatogr. A 2022 1669 462929 10.1016/j.chroma.2022.462929 35279555
122 Pradita T. Chen Y.J. Mernie E. Bendulo S. Chen Y.J. ZIC-cHILIC functionalized magnetic nanoparticle for rapid and sensitive glycopeptide enrichment from <1 µL serum. Nanomaterials 2021 11 9 2159 10.3390/nano11092159 34578474
123 Fu D. Liu Y. Shen A. Xiao Y. Yu L. Liang X. Preparation of glutathione-functionalized zwitterionic silica material for efficient enrichment of sialylated N-glycopeptides. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2019 411 18 4131 4140 10.1007/s00216-019-01661-0 30828761
124 Wang H. Wong C.H. Chin A. Taguchi A. Taylor A. Hanash S. Sekiya S. Takahashi H. Murase M. Kajihara S. Iwamoto S. Tanaka K. Integrated mass spectrometry–based analysis of plasma glycoproteins and their glycan modifications. Nat. Protoc. 2011 6 3 253 269 10.1038/nprot.2010.176 21372808
125 Darula Z. Sarnyai F. Medzihradszky K.F. O-glycosylation sites identified from mucin core-1 type glycopeptides from human serum. Glycoconj. J. 2016 33 3 435 445 10.1007/s10719-015-9630-6 26729242
126 Adav S.S. Hwa H.H. de Kleijn D. Sze S.K. Improving blood plasma glycoproteome coverage by coupling ultracentrifugation fractionation to electrostatic repulsion–hydrophilic interaction chromatography enrichment. J. Proteome Res. 2015 14 7 2828 2838 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00102 26044363
127 Yang W. Song A. Ao M. Xu Y. Zhang H. Large-scale site-specific mapping of the O-GalNAc glycoproteome. Nat. Protoc. 2020 15 8 2589 2610 10.1038/s41596-020-0345-1 32681153
128 Chen W. Smeekens J.M. Wu R. A universal chemical enrichment method for mapping the yeast N-glycoproteome by mass spectrometry (MS). Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2014 13 6 1563 1572 10.1074/mcp.M113.036251 24692641
129 Morgenstern D. Wolf-Levy H. Tickotsky-Moskovitz N. Cooper I. Buchman A.S. Bennett D.A. Beeri M.S. Levin Y. Optimized glycopeptide enrichment method–it is all about the sauce. Anal. Chem. 2022 94 29 10308 10313 10.1021/acs.analchem.2c00524 35764435
130 Chen S.Y. Dong M. Yang G. Zhou Y. Clark D.J. Lih T.M. Schnaubelt M. Liu Z. Zhang H. Glycans, glycosite, and intact glycopeptide analysis of n-linked glycoproteins using liquid handling systems. Anal. Chem. 2020 92 2 1680 1686 10.1021/acs.analchem.9b03761 31859482
131 Keser T. Tijardović M.; Gornik, I.; Lukić E.; Lauc, G.; Gornik, O.; Novokmet, M. High-throughput and site-specific N-glycosylation analysis of human alpha-1-acid glycoprotein offers a great potential for new biomarker discovery. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2021 20 100044 10.1074/mcp.RA120.002433 33493676
132 Mnatsakanyan R. Shema G. Basik M. Batist G. Borchers C.H. Sickmann A. Zahedi R.P. Detecting post-translational modification signatures as potential biomarkers in clinical mass spectrometry. Expert Rev. Proteomics 2018 15 6 515 535 10.1080/14789450.2018.1483340 29893147
133 Pascovici D. Wu J.X. McKay M.J. Joseph C. Noor Z. Kamath K. Wu Y. Ranganathan S. Gupta V. Mirzaei M. Clinically relevant post-translational modification analyses—maturing workflows and bioinformatics tools. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018 20 1 16 10.3390/ijms20010016 30577541
134 Rush J. Moritz A. Lee K.A. Guo A. Goss V.L. Spek E.J. Zhang H. Zha X.M. Polakiewicz R.D. Comb M.J. Immunoaffinity profiling of tyrosine phosphorylation in cancer cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 2005 23 1 94 101 10.1038/nbt1046 15592455
135 Stokes M.P. Farnsworth C.L. Moritz A. Silva J.C. Jia X. Lee K.A. Guo A. Polakiewicz R.D. Comb M.J. PTMScan direct: Identification and quantification of peptides from critical signaling proteins by immunoaffinity enrichment coupled with LC-MS/MS. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2012 11 5 187 201 10.1074/mcp.M111.015883 22322096
136 Svinkina T. Gu H. Silva J.C. Mertins P. Qiao J. Fereshetian S. Jaffe J.D. Kuhn E. Udeshi N.D. Carr S.A. Deep, quantitative coverage of the lysine acetylome using novel anti-acetyl-lysine antibodies and an optimized proteomic workflow. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2015 14 9 2429 2440 10.1074/mcp.O114.047555 25953088
137 Guo A. Gu H. Zhou J. Mulhern D. Wang Y. Lee K.A. Yang V. Aguiar M. Kornhauser J. Jia X. Ren J. Beausoleil S.A. Silva J.C. Vemulapalli V. Bedford M.T. Comb M.J. Immunoaffinity enrichment and mass spectrometry analysis of protein methylation. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2014 13 1 372 387 10.1074/mcp.O113.027870 24129315
138 Lumpkin R.J. Gu H. Zhu Y. Leonard M. Ahmad A.S. Clauser K.R. Meyer J.G. Bennett E.J. Komives E.A. Site-specific identification and quantitation of endogenous SUMO modifications under native conditions. Nat. Commun. 2017 8 1 1171 10.1038/s41467-017-01271-3 29079793
139 Gu H. Ren J.M. Jia X. Levy T. Rikova K. Yang V. Lee K.A. Stokes M.P. Silva J.C. Quantitative profiling of post-translational modifications by immunoaffinity enrichment and lc-ms/ms in cancer serum without immunodepletion. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2016 15 2 692 702 10.1074/mcp.O115.052266 26635363
140 Nakamura A. Kaneko N. Villemagne V.L. Kato T. Doecke J. Doré V. Fowler C. Li Q.X. Martins R. Rowe C. Tomita T. Matsuzaki K. Ishii K. Ishii K. Arahata Y. Iwamoto S. Ito K. Tanaka K. Masters C.L. Yanagisawa K. High performance plasma amyloid-β biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 2018 554 7691 249 254 10.1038/nature25456 29420472
141 Kirmess K.M. Meyer M.R. Holubasch M.S. Knapik S.S. Hu Y. Jackson E.N. Harpstrite S.E. Verghese P.B. West T. Fogelman I. Braunstein J.B. Yarasheski K.E. Contois J.H. The PrecivityAD™ test: Accurate and reliable LC-MS/MS assays for quantifying plasma amyloid beta 40 and 42 and apolipoprotein E proteotype for the assessment of brain amyloidosis. Clin. Chim. Acta 2021 519 267 275 10.1016/j.cca.2021.05.011 34015303
142 Bauzá-Martinez J. Aletti F. Pinto B.B. Ribas V. Odena M.A. Díaz R. Romay E. Ferrer R. Kistler E.B. Tedeschi G. Schmid-Schönbein G.W. Herpain A. Bendjelid K. de Oliveira E. Proteolysis in septic shock patients: Plasma peptidomic patterns are associated with mortality. Br. J. Anaesth. 2018 121 5 1065 1074 10.1016/j.bja.2018.05.072 30336851
143 Zhu P. Bowden P. Zhang D. Marshall J.G. Mass spectrometry of peptides and proteins from human blood. Mass Spectrom. Rev. 2011 30 5 685 732 10.1002/mas.20291 24737629
144 Foreman R.E. George A.L. Reimann F. Gribble F.M. Kay R.G. Peptidomics: A review of clinical applications and methodologies. J. Proteome Res. 2021 20 8 3782 3797 10.1021/acs.jproteome.1c00295 34270237
145 Yu W. Hurley J. Roberts D. Chakrabortty S.K. Enderle D. Noerholm M. Breakefield X.O. Skog J.K. Exosome-based liquid biopsies in cancer: Opportunities and challenges. Ann. Oncol. 2021 32 4 466 477 10.1016/j.annonc.2021.01.074 33548389
146 Barbo M. Ravnik-Glavač M. Extracellular vesicles as potential biomarkers in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Genes 2023 14 2 325 10.3390/genes14020325 36833252
147 Ollen-Bittle N. Roseborough A.D. Wang W. Wu J.D. Whitehead S.N. Mechanisms and biomarker potential of extracellular vesicles in stroke. Biology 2022 11 8 1231 10.3390/biology11081231 36009857
148 Cocucci E. Racchetti G. Meldolesi J. Shedding microvesicles: Artefacts no more. Trends Cell Biol. 2009 19 2 43 51 10.1016/j.tcb.2008.11.003 19144520
149 Chen I.H. Xue L. Hsu C.C. Paez J.S.P. Pan L. Andaluz H. Wendt M.K. Iliuk A.B. Zhu J.K. Tao W.A. Phosphoproteins in extracellular vesicles as candidate markers for breast cancer. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2017 114 12 3175 3180 10.1073/pnas.1618088114 28270605
150 Andaluz Aguilar H. Iliuk A.B. Chen I.H. Tao W.A. Sequential phosphoproteomics and N-glycoproteomics of plasma-derived extracellular vesicles. Nat. Protoc. 2020 15 1 161 180 10.1038/s41596-019-0260-5 31863077
151 Konoshenko M.Y. Lekchnov E.A. Vlassov A.V. Laktionov P.P. Isolation of extracellular vesicles: General methodologies and latest trends. BioMed Res. Int. 2018 2018 1 27 10.1155/2018/8545347 29662902
152 Royo F. Théry C. Falcón-Pérez J.M. Nieuwland R. Witwer K.W. Methods for separation and characterization of extracellular vesicles: Results of a worldwide survey performed by the ISEV rigor and standardization subcommittee. Cells 2020 9 9 1955 10.3390/cells9091955 32854228
153 Ayala-Mar S. Donoso-Quezada J. Gallo-Villanueva R.C. Perez-Gonzalez V.H. González-Valdez J. Recent advances and challenges in the recovery and purification of cellular exosomes. Electrophoresis 2019 40 23-24 3036 3049 10.1002/elps.201800526 31373715
154 Gandham S. Su X. Wood J. Nocera A.L. Alli S.C. Milane L. Zimmerman A. Amiji M. Ivanov A.R. Technologies and standardization in research on extracellular vesicles. Trends Biotechnol. 2020 38 10 1066 1098 10.1016/j.tibtech.2020.05.012 32564882
155 Helwa I. Cai J. Drewry M.D. Zimmerman A. Dinkins M.B. Khaled M.L. Seremwe M. Dismuke W.M. Bieberich E. Stamer W.D. Hamrick M.W. Liu Y. A comparative study of serum exosome isolation using differential ultracentrifugation and three commercial reagents. PLoS One 2017 12 1 e0170628 10.1371/journal.pone.0170628 28114422
156 Ueda K. Ishikawa N. Tatsuguchi A. Saichi N. Fujii R. Nakagawa H. Antibody-coupled monolithic silica microtips for highthroughput molecular profiling of circulating exosomes. Sci. Rep. 2014 4 1 6232 10.1038/srep06232 25167841
157 Chen C. Lin B.R. Hsu M.Y. Cheng C.M. Paper-based devices for isolation and characterization of extracellular vesicles. J. Vis. Exp. 2015 98 e52722 25867034
158 Fang S. Tian H. Li X. Jin D. Li X. Kong J. Yang C. Yang X. Lu Y. Luo Y. Lin B. Niu W. Liu T. Clinical application of a microfluidic chip for immunocapture and quantification of circulating exosomes to assist breast cancer diagnosis and molecular classification. PLoS One 2017 12 4 e0175050 10.1371/journal.pone.0175050 28369094
159 Balaj L. Atai N.A. Chen W. Mu D. Tannous B.A. Breakefield X.O. Skog J. Maguire C.A. Heparin affinity purification of extracellular vesicles. Sci. Rep. 2015 5 1 10266 10.1038/srep10266 25988257
160 Mondal S.K. Whiteside T.L. Immunoaffinity-based isolation of melanoma cell-derived and T cell-derived exosomes from plasma of melanoma patients. Methods Mol. Biol. 2021 2265 305 321 10.1007/978-1-0716-1205-7_23 33704724
161 Sharma P. Ludwig S. Muller L. Hong C.S. Kirkwood J.M. Ferrone S. Whiteside T.L. Immunoaffinity‐based isolation of melanoma cell‐derived exosomes from plasma of patients with melanoma. J. Extracell. Vesicles 2018 7 1 1435138 10.1080/20013078.2018.1435138 29511460
162 Mathivanan S. Lim J.W.E. Tauro B.J. Ji H. Moritz R.L. Simpson R.J. Proteomics analysis of A33 immunoaffinity-purified exosomes released from the human colon tumor cell line LIM1215 reveals a tissue-specific protein signature. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2010 9 2 197 208 10.1074/mcp.M900152-MCP200 19837982
163 King C.D. Kapp K.L. Arul A.B. Choi M.J. Robinson R.A.S. Advancements in automation for plasma proteomics sample preparation. Mol. Omics 2022 18 9 828 839 10.1039/D2MO00122E 36048090
164 Fu Q. Murray C.I. Karpov O.A. Van Eyk J.E. Automated proteomic sample preparation: The key component for high throughput and quantitative mass spectrometry analysis. Mass Spectrom. Rev. 2023 42 2 873 886 10.1002/mas.21750 34786750
165 Razavi M. Leigh Anderson N. Pope M.E. Yip R. Pearson T.W. High precision quantification of human plasma proteins using the automated SISCAPA Immuno-MS workflow. N. Biotechnol. 2016 33 5 494 502 10.1016/j.nbt.2015.12.008 26772726
166 Razavi M. Farrokhi V. Yip R. Anderson N.L. Pearson T.W. Neubert H. Measuring the turnover rate of clinically important plasma proteins using an automated siscapa workflow. Clin. Chem. 2019 65 3 492 494 10.1373/clinchem.2018.294892 30626630
167 Whiteaker J.R. Zhao L. Anderson L. Paulovich A.G. An automated and multiplexed method for high throughput peptide immunoaffinity enrichment and multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry-based quantification of protein biomarkers. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 2010 9 1 184 196 10.1074/mcp.M900254-MCP200 19843560
168 Niu L. Thiele M. Geyer P.E. Rasmussen D.N. Webel H.E. Santos A. Gupta R. Meier F. Strauss M. Kjaergaard M. Lindvig K. Jacobsen S. Rasmussen S. Hansen T. Krag A. Mann M. Noninvasive proteomic biomarkers for alcohol-related liver disease. Nat. Med. 2022 28 6 1277 1287 10.1038/s41591-022-01850-y 35654907
169 Bennike T.B. Steen H. High-throughput parallel proteomic sample preparation using 96-well polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes and C18 purification plates. Methods Mol. Biol. 2017 1619 395 402 10.1007/978-1-4939-7057-5_27 28674899
170 Thomas S.N. French D. Jannetto P.J. Rappold B.A. Clarke W.A. Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry for clinical diagnostics. Nat Rev Methods Primers 2022 2 1 96 10.1038/s43586-022-00175-x 36532107
171 Li D. Yi J. Han G. Qiao L. MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry in clinical analysis and research. ACS Measurem. Sci. Au 2022 2 5 385 404 10.1021/acsmeasuresciau.2c00019 36785658
172 Wang J. Pursell M.E. DeVor A. Awoyemi O. Valentine S.J. Li P. Portable mass spectrometry system: Instrumentation, applications, and path to ‘omics analysis. Proteomics 2022 22 23-24 2200112 10.1002/pmic.202200112 36349734
173 Zhai Y. Liu S. Gao L. Hu L. Xu W. Direct biological sample analyses by laserspray ionization miniature mass spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 2018 90 9 5696 5702 10.1021/acs.analchem.7b05366 29562126
174 Chiang S. Zhang W. Farnsworth C. Zhu Y. Lee K. Ouyang Z. Targeted quantification of peptides using miniature mass spectrometry. J. Proteome Res. 2020 19 5 2043 2052 10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00875 32202427
