
==== Front
PLoS One
PLoS One
plos
PLOS ONE
1932-6203
Public Library of Science San Francisco, CA USA

10.1371/journal.pone.0304959
PONE-D-23-34044
Research Article
Biology and Life Sciences
Ecology
Community Ecology
Community Structure
Ecology and Environmental Sciences
Ecology
Community Ecology
Community Structure
Biology and Life Sciences
Microbiology
Medical Microbiology
Microbiome
Biology and Life Sciences
Genetics
Genomics
Microbial Genomics
Microbiome
Biology and Life Sciences
Microbiology
Microbial Genomics
Microbiome
Biology and Life Sciences
Organisms
Bacteria
Biology and Life Sciences
Ecology
Microbial Ecology
Ecology and Environmental Sciences
Ecology
Microbial Ecology
Biology and Life Sciences
Microbiology
Microbial Ecology
Biology and Life Sciences
Biochemistry
Biomarkers
Biology and Life Sciences
Ecology
Community Ecology
Ecology and Environmental Sciences
Ecology
Community Ecology
Medicine and Health Sciences
Medical Conditions
Infectious Diseases
Disease Vectors
Ticks
Biology and Life Sciences
Species Interactions
Disease Vectors
Ticks
Biology and Life Sciences
Organisms
Eukaryota
Animals
Invertebrates
Arthropoda
Arachnida
Ixodes
Ticks
Biology and Life Sciences
Zoology
Animals
Invertebrates
Arthropoda
Arachnida
Ixodes
Ticks
Biology and Life Sciences
Microbiology
Medical Microbiology
Microbial Pathogens
Bacterial Pathogens
Medicine and Health Sciences
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
Pathogens
Microbial Pathogens
Bacterial Pathogens
The microbiota of Amblyomma americanum reflects known westward expansion
A. americanum microbiota and range expansion
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9628-4081
Martinez-Villegas Luis Conceptualization Data curation Formal analysis Investigation Methodology Visualization Writing – original draft Writing – review & editing 1
Lado Paula Conceptualization Formal analysis Investigation Methodology Visualization Writing – original draft Writing – review & editing 2 ¤
Klompen Hans Conceptualization Funding acquisition Methodology Project administration Resources Supervision 3
Wang Selena Formal analysis 4
https://orcid.org/0009-0007-1892-1069
Cummings Caleb Formal analysis 4
Pesapane Risa Conceptualization Data curation Formal analysis Funding acquisition Methodology Project administration Resources 4 5
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1074-8982
Short Sarah M. Conceptualization Formal analysis Funding acquisition Resources Visualization Writing – original draft Writing – review & editing 1 *
1 Department of Entomology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America
2 Department of Evolution, Ecology and Organismal Biology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America
3 Department of Evolution, Ecology, and Organismal Biology and Museum of Biological Diversity, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America
4 Veterinary Preventive Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America
5 School of Environment and Natural Resources, College of Food, Agricultural, and Environmental Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America
abuowarda Mai Editor
Cairo University Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, EGYPT
Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

¤ Current address: Paula Lado, National Bio and Agro-Defense Facility, USDA Agricultural Research Service (ARS), Manhattan, Kansas, United States of America

* E-mail: short.343@osu.edu
10 6 2024
2024
19 6 e030495917 10 2023
22 5 2024
https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/ This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

Amblyomma americanum, a known vector of multiple tick-borne pathogens, has expanded its geographic distribution across the United States in the past decades. Tick microbiomes may play a role shaping their host’s life history and vectorial capacity. Bacterial communities associated with A. americanum may reflect, or enable, geographic expansion and studying the microbiota will improve understanding of tick-borne disease ecology. We examined the microbiota structure of 189 adult ticks collected in four regions encompassing their historical and current geographic distribution. Both geographic region of origin and sex were significant predictors of alpha diversity. As in other tick models, within-sample diversity was low and uneven given the presence of dominant endosymbionts. Beta diversity analyses revealed that bacterial profiles of ticks of both sexes collected in the West were significantly different from those of the Historic range. Biomarkers were identified for all regions except the historical range. In addition, Bray-Curtis dissimilarities overall increased with distance between sites. Relative quantification of ecological processes showed that, for females and males, respectively, drift and dispersal limitation were the primary drivers of community assembly. Collectively, our findings highlight how microbiota structural variance discriminates the western-expanded populations of A. americanum ticks from the Historical range. Spatial autocorrelation, and particularly the detection of non-selective ecological processes, are indicative of geographic isolation. We also found that prevalence of Ehrlichia chaffeensis, E. ewingii, and Anaplasma phagocytophilum ranged from 3.40–5.11% and did not significantly differ by region. Rickettsia rickettsii was absent from our samples. Our conclusions demonstrate the value of synergistic analysis of biogeographic and microbial ecology data in investigating range expansion in A. americanum and potentially other tick vectors as well.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100017224 College of Food, Agricultural, and Environmental Sciences, Ohio State University The Ohio State University Infectious Diseases Institute http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100008788 College of Veterinary Medicine, Ohio State University LM and SMS were supported by the Ohio State University Infectious Diseases Institute (https://idi.osu.edu/) and the Ohio State University College of Food, Agricultural, and Environmental Sciences (https://cfaes.osu.edu/). RP, SW, and CC were supported by the Ohio State University College of Food, Agricultural, and Environmental Sciences (https://cfaes.osu.edu/) and the Ohio State University College of Veterinary Medicine (https://vet.osu.edu). the funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. Data AvailabilityNucleotide sequences were deposited in the Sequence Read Archive and are accessible with the accession PRJNA976750.
Data Availability

Nucleotide sequences were deposited in the Sequence Read Archive and are accessible with the accession PRJNA976750.
==== Body
pmcIntroduction

Prevalence of multiple tick-borne diseases (TBDs) e.g., Lyme disease, anaplasmosis, ehrlichiosis, and spotted fever group rickettsiosis have substantially increased in the past 12 years in the United States [1]. The pathogens that cause these diseases are transmitted by hard ticks primarily in the genera Ixodes (Lyme, anaplasmosis), Amblyomma (ehrlichiosis, rickettsiosis), and Dermacentor (rickettsiosis). The reasons behind these increases are multifactorial, but one main cause is hypothesized to be the geographic range expansion of the ticks that transmit these pathogens [2, 3]. Among them, Amblyomma americanum, historically found in the southeastern USA [4], has rapidly expanded its geographic range in the past decades reaching Michigan, Pennsylvania, and New York in the north, while extending to Nebraska and South Dakota in the west [5–7]. In addition, reports of its presence in Canadian provinces include Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, Quebec and Ontario [8]. In many vector models [9–12], climate and anthropogenic environmental changes are critical interacting drivers of tick range expansion, e.g., by making habitats more amenable, or altering host density and distribution [2, 13–17]. In A. americanum, shifts in land use and host population densities may be the critical drivers of expansion. Additionally, it is hypothesized that A. americanum’s recent expansion is at least in part a re-occupation of its ancestral range [18–20]. Understanding how the biology of ticks varies along environmental gradients and landscapes may prove critical to improve our TBD control efforts [21–25]. One relevant aspect of tick biology is the tick microbiota, i.e., the bacterial community associated with ticks throughout their life cycle.

The advancement of high throughput sequencing (HTS) has led to a more thorough profiling and characterization of the microbial communities associated with ticks [26]. Although some functional roles of the tick microbiota have been elucidated, the field is far from fully explaining the intricacies of host-microbiota interactions in ticks [26–28]. Nonetheless, evidence of bacterial community structuring based on habitat or geographic region of origin (henceforth, region) has been detected in several tick hosts, predominantly Ixodes and Dermacentor [29–35]. This suggests the microbiota may have relevance for understanding tick range expansions and has led to calls for more microbiome studies spanning more tick species in wider geographic ranges [36]. By broadening the spatial scales of tick microbiota studies, we may improve our understanding of the role of the microbiota in TBD ecology.

In addition to its potential role in informing the occurrence of tick range expansion, the tick microbiota has other effects that may facilitate range expansion. For instance, bacterial pathogens such as Anaplasma and Borrelia induce physiological changes impacting their Ixodes hosts’ survival, questing, mobility, and feeding activity (reviewed in [37]). The increased synthesis of heat shock proteins [38] or antifreeze glycoproteins [39] induced by Anaplasma infection could improve tick survival when moving over long distances. Borrelia infected Ixodes nymphs have higher fat content, which may confer a benefit when colonizing challenging habitats (cold weather and/or high elevation) [40]. Beyond these effects, the tick microbiota also plays fundamental roles in tick biology. As obligate blood feeders, ticks rely on endosymbionts (Rickettsia, Coxiella-like, Francisella-like, Candidatus Midchloria) to obtain vitamin B and cofactors that are either scarce or not readily available in blood [41–43]. Experimental and computational evidence also suggests a role of commensal and symbiont bacteria in tick host reproductive fitness [44], immune response [45–47]; and vector competence [48, 49]. Predictive functional studies of tick microbiota are few [50, 51] but, in combination with taxonomic profiling and functional genomics, could enhance our understanding of the microbiome’s influence on host biology [50, 52]. Thus, and as in other vector models [49, 53, 54], the study of the tripartite vector-pathogen-microbiome interactions is critical to understanding vector biology and ecology.

We recently attempted to detect signal of A. americanum range expansion at the genetic level by analyzing the population structure of the same ticks used for this study [18]. Lado et al. [18] results suggested that ticks from the edge populations, which possessed low diversity, may be at the front of expansion based on genetic theory [55, 56]. Therefore, we sought to determine whether microbiota structure could provide an alternative ecological signal of range expansion in these same individuals. A recent study in Ixodes ricinus revealed that bacterial community structures reflected range expansion along elevation clines, supporting use of this approach for our question [57]. Here, we analyzed microbiota spatial structuring between expanded and historic range populations of female and male A. americanum and the extent to which geographic distance and ecological forces drive bacterial community turnover. Furthermore, we tested for the presence of known vertebrate bacterial pathogens to identify signature microbiota profiles predictive of tick infection status.

Materials and methods

Sampling of tick specimens

The adult unfed ticks used in this study are the same as Lado et al. [18]. We caught all ticks in the wild by dragging a cloth through the ground vegetation and then preserving them in 95% ethanol. When needed, authorities of the Department of Natural Resources from OH, MI, and IN were contacted in advance to collect samples. Otherwise, samples were collected in locations where a park ranger could grant permission on-site, or in public access locations. Some samples were shared by collaborators as stated in the acknowledgments. In total the dataset is comprised of 189 A. americanum specimens (females = 98; males = 91) collected at 24 localities in 17 states distributed across the historic and expanded ranges for this species according to Monzón et al. [7] (see Table 1, and S1 File for metadata). As in [18], informed by available literature and consensus [7], we divided the samples into 4 regions to which we refer throughout the manuscript as: (i) Historic (HC), corresponding to the historic range for this species; (ii) Midwest (MW), located within the expanded range and containing the samples from OH; (iii) West (W), encompassing samples from the expanded range collected from KS and OK; and (iv) Northeast (NE), encompassing samples from the expanded range collected from RI, MD, and VA. The rationale behind this experimental design was to contrast the microbiota of specimens from populations that have been long established to those from populations considered to be at edge zones along the expanded range [18]. Therefore, diversity analyses presented in this study represent comparisons between the above-mentioned regions, and not individual States, as that would create more bias than what can be already expected from field collections. Detailed information for all ticks can be found at the Ohio State Acarology Collection (OSAL) database accessible at: (https://acarology.osu.edu/database).

10.1371/journal.pone.0304959.t001 Table 1 Summarized sample metadata1.

Region	States included in region	Sample size by sex	
HC	12	68 females, 61 males	
NE	3	14 females, 13 males	
MW	1	5 females, 7 males	
W	2	11 females, 10 males	
1. Full metadata for all samples can be found in S1 Table in S1 File.

DNA extraction

The DNA samples employed here are the same as in our population structure study [18]. Briefly, we extracted genomic DNA from each individual tick following methods reported previously [35]. All the ticks, in random order, were surface sterilized twice using commercial bleach (Clorox, NaOCl active bleach) at 3% for one minute, rinsed with distilled water and then washed with 95% ethanol for one minute. We then extracted DNA from each individual using the Qiagen Dneasy Blood and Tissue kit as per manufacturers’ instructions with one modification as in [58]: a cut was made at the posterior-lateral part of the tick idiosoma to allow ATL buffer to reach all tissues. Afterwards we recovered the cuticle (exoskeleton) of each tick to use as voucher specimens. Their corresponding OSAL accession numbers are listed in Table 1. Genomic DNA was then quantified using a Qubit 3.0 fluorimeter, aliquoted and stored at -80°C for subsequent downstream high-throughput sequencing and pathogen PCR screening.

16S rRNA library preparation and high throughput sequencing (HTS)

Genomic DNA (gDNA) from each of the 189 specimens was normalized to 10ng/μl and then, along with two negative controls, shipped to Argonne National Laboratory for library preparation and HTS following in-house standard operations as a single batch. We included two negative controls representing extraction and library blanks as suggested by [59] aiming to detect potential spurious environmental taxa. For taxonomic profiling through HTS we targeted the V4-V5 hypervariable region (product size of 411 bp) with the 515F-Y / 926R primers [60, 61] in a 2 X 250 bp paired-end run with an Illumina MiSeq Next Generation sequencing system. This primer set generates diversity profiles concordant with those produced with V4 amplicons [60], while enhancing phylogenetic resolution [61]. Our amplicon choice falls within the predominant targets in other tick microbiome studies (reviewed by [26]), which mostly sequenced one or more targets within the V1-V4 regions. Approximately 200 to 500 bp reads provide quality taxonomic resolution to identify many, though not all, bacterial species [61]. Therefore, we determined that sequencing the V4 region (~254 bp in length), which is most informative among the 9 hypervariable regions for detecting diversity within tick microbiomes [62], plus the V5 region ensured the most thorough bacterial community survey. This primer set has been successfully used in other microbiome studies [63–66], including ticks [35] with similar library preparation parameters [35, 63–65]. Demultiplexed raw sequences were provided by the sequencing facility.

Bioinformatic analyses

R code for all the procedures described below can be found in S2 File.

(i) Amplicon sequence variant (ASV) detection, taxonomic assignment, decontamination, and additional processing

Raw fastq sequences were analyzed using DADA2 v1.16 [67] in R v4.2.1 [68] within the Rstudio environment v2022.7.1.554 [69] following the workflow and using the default parameters suggested by the developer at: (https://benjjneb.github.io/dada2/tutorial.html). After executing the quality filtering, trimming, and sample inference steps we detected that the forward and reverse sequences were not merging optimally. We attempted to rectify this using different truncation lengths for the forward and reverse reads and allowing for shorter minimum overlaps as in [65, 66], but this did not satisfactorily recover our merging output. Bioinformatic approaches have been proposed to overcome the problem of non-merging reads, but these approaches have not been thoroughly evaluated for ASVs [70]. Therefore, we considered that the best option was to carry out the downstream workflow with quality filtered forward reads only as suggested by the DADA2 developer (https://github.com/benjjneb/dada2/issues/761). As the core denoising algorithm is applied before merging to increase accuracy, nearly all substitution errors have been removed before this step [61]. The use of single end reads does result in sequences that are shorter in length than expected. In this scenario, the extent to which identities can accurately be resolved at low taxonomic levels is hindered, but not the validity of the ASVs and their derived profiles and diversity estimations [70]. It is known that use of OTUs can influence diversity estimates (inflation), taxonomic resolution, and reproducibility [71, 72]. However, use of single versus paired-end reads does not change the relationships between bacterial community profiles observed with Bray-Curtis distances [73, 74]. Other microbiome studies targeting arthropod vectors [75, 76], and human samples [77] have successfully utilized this processing approach as well.

After creating the ASV count table and removing chimeras, we proceeded to assign taxonomy using the DADA2 formatted RDP training set (version 18). We then imported both the ASV count and taxonomy tables to the phyloseq R package v1.30.0 [78] for downstream microbial ecology analyses. We then removed ASVs not identified as k_Bacteria and those classified as mitochondria or chloroplasts from the phyloseq object. With the information provided by the blank samples we used the decontam R package v1.6 [79] with its default prevalence filtering parameters to remove ASVs identified as contamination. Both control samples were then removed from the dataset. Finally, as in [35], we reduced the dimension of the dataset with an abundance and prevalence filtering step. We removed ASVs accounting for fewer than 10 total reads and represented in fewer than 10% of the samples to reduce the chances of sequencing errors being identified as rare ASVs that could impact the diversity analyses. This was particularly relevant given our choice to work with forward reads only.

(ii) Alpha diversity

Measures of alpha diversity including observed taxonomic richness, Chao-1, ACE, Shannon, and Simpson indices were calculated for each sample with phyloseq (S3 File). We chose to focus our analysis and diversity plots primarily on the Gini-Simpsons’ diversity index (1-D) [80] as it allows for a clear and intuitive ecological interpretation, while also being less affected by sequencing coverage [81] and spurious elements in the count tables [82]. We evaluated effects of region and sex on alpha diversity using a GLM with a quasibinomial distribution followed by a Tukey’s test. Boxplots were performed with the ggpubr v0.4.0 [83] and GLM was run using statsv4.1.3.

(iii) Beta diversity

First, we generated a stacked barplot with ggplot2 v3.3.6 [84] to observe the relative abundances of the Order level taxa present within each sample. We then assessed if there were differences in bacterial community structures between ticks based on Bray-Curtis (BC) dissimilarities estimated on Hellinger-transformed ASV abundances generated with the decostand function in the vegan v2.6.2 R package [85]. We chose to use BC dissimilarities and Hellinger-transformed data because our dataset contained many zeros. In datasets such as these (ones with joint absences or double zeroes), one approach is to standardize the data (as reviewed in [86]). We chose to use the Hellinger transformation because it reduces the weight of rare taxa (ASVs with low counts and many zeroes) when estimating community structure differences [87], thereby resulting in a conservative approach. Furthermore, BC dissimilarities are suited for this type of community data analysis as they exclude the effect of joint absences [88]. In addition to this, the Hellinger transformation solves the problem of the linear assumptions in PCoA ordinations [89]. After transforming the data and calculating BC dissimilarities, we performed a PCoA with vegan for each tick sex. We chose to use PCoA because it is compatible with dissimilarities, such as BC [90]. We used a permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) [91] to test the effects of region and sex on beta diversity using the adonis2 function in the R package vegan. We also split the dataset by sex and ran pairwise PERMANOVA with the pairwiseAdonis v0.4 R package [92] to test differences between each region.

We also tested for ASVs that significantly discriminated between tick region and sex. For this, we applied indicator species analysis [93], which relies on community ecology principles to identify ASVs that significantly reflect their niche states (p < 0.05). We ran the “multipatt” function within the indicspecies package v1.7.0 using the “Indval.g” function to address uneven groups. Plots were created to report indicator ASVs above arbitrary Indicator statistic (Indicstat) thresholds. When considering tick sex, markers with an Indicstat >0.80 for males and the only female marker were plotted. When considering region, markers with and Indicstat > 0.60 were plotted.

(iv) Mantel correlogram

To study spatial autocorrelation, we separated the dataset by sex and used Mantel correlograms to evaluate how bacterial composition signal behaved across a range of geographic distances given the coordinates at which samples were collected. We generated the Mantel correlograms with the function “mantel.correlog” in vegan performing 999 randomizations and progressive FDR corrections to test for significance. Mantel correlograms, like semivariograms, show the level of autocorrelation in samples from different geographic locations (Table 1). They also reveal whether distance in one measure correlates positively or inversely with increasing distance in the other index. To generate a Mantel correlogram, we estimated spearman correlations between a matrix of geographic distances and corresponding Bray-Curtis distances over a spatial scale arbitrarily assigned using Sturges’ formula [94]. We interpreted the correlograms as suggested by [95].

(v) Estimation of ecological processes driving community turnover

We used null-model analysis to evaluate the contribution of ecological processes on the bacterial community assembly. All the required steps were performed using the trans_nullmodel class function from the microeco R package v0.9.0 [96] following the tutorial workflow provided at: (https://chiliubio.github.io/microeco_tutorial/model-based-class.html#trans_nullmodel-class). This analysis is based on the methodology described by [97, 98] based on Vellend’s conceptual framework [99]. We used this method to quantify the relative influence of ecological processes shaping within-tick bacterial structures. The sequence of analyses includes the calculation of the phylogenetic signal, beta mean nearest taxon distance (βMNTD), beta nearest taxon index (βNTI) and Bray-Curtis-based Raup-Crick (RCBray) measures. Briefly, we first obtained the βMNTD from all the pairwise comparisons among ticks from the same sex. The measured difference between observed βMNTD and the null model, is termed βNTI, which we then used in combination with measured RCBray dissimilarities as classifying parameters to assign how the calculated proportions pertain to deterministic or stochastic processes following the interpretation criteria proposed by [97]. These criteria can be summarized as follows: β-NTI scores greater than + 2 indicated variable selection pressures whereas scores less than -2 indicated homogeneous selective pressures. Based on the RCBray index, we then inferred the contribution of the stochastic processes as follows: the fraction of pairwise comparisons with RCBray between -0.95 and +0.95 pertained to drift acting alone. The fraction with RCBray < -0.95 indicated homogeneous dispersal, and finally the fraction with RCBray > +0.95 was assigned to dispersal limitation. We tabulated the fractions assigned to each process grouping them by tick sex and visualized the comparison with a bubble plot using ggplot2.

Tick-borne pathogen (TBP) detection using qPCR

Probe-based real-time PCR (qPCR) singleplex assays using primers and probes with established sensitivity and specificity were used to detect the vertebrate pathogens Ehrlichia chaffeensis, E. ewingii, Rickettsia rickettsii, and Anaplasma phagocytophilum [100–102]. A 20μL reaction containing Taqman Fast Advanced Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA) and 2μL of tick gDNA template was performed with thermocycling conditions of 95°C for 3 minutes then 50 cycles of 95°C for 3 seconds followed by 60°C for 45 seconds. In each reaction, a no-template control of molecular-grade nuclease-free water and a synthetic gBlock fragment (Integrated DNA Technologies) of E. chaffeensis (AF403711.1), E. ewingii (AY428950.1), R. (A1G_04230), or A. phagocytophilum (AY151054.1) were included as controls. Samples were considered positive if a characteristic amplification curve was observed below a cycle threshold of 40. All positives were run in duplicate. Refer to S4 File for a summary table of the PCR primers.

Results

Sequencing overview

We sequenced the bacterial community of 189 A. americanum ticks and two negative controls. This resulted in 6,609,083 high-quality reads. After decontamination and removal of the control samples, our data set was comprised of 6,017,532 with a median number of reads per sample of 33879 (average 32328.46; range 1528–53310). After filtering the ASVs by total abundance and prevalence in the dataset, a total of 2224 ASVs remained and were used in downstream microbial ecology analyses.

The bacterial community structure of A. americanum is dominated by a few taxa

When agglomerated at the Order taxonomic level (Fig 1), the most abundant ASVs within most samples were assigned to the Orders Coxiellales, Rickettsiales, and Diplorickettsiales which accounted for 82.53%, 12.27% and 1.77% of the dataset respectively, and encompassed the 9 core ASVs present in at least 90% of the samples. The top 3 ASVs mapped to Coxiella, Rickettsia amblyommatis, and Rickettsiella grylli. The first two taxa have been reported previously as common and abundant endosymbionts of A. americanum [44, 103–105] while the third was dominant in only 3 tick samples (Fig 1, Order Diplorickettsiales). ASVs within the Coxiellales Order were clearly dominant in females, whereas male ticks’ communities were dominated by both Coxiellales and Rickettsiales with some individuals presenting more diverse profiles (Fig 1).

10.1371/journal.pone.0304959.g001 Fig 1 Bacterial abundance profiles of individual ticks parsed by sex.

Relative abundances of the most common bacteria at the Order taxonomic level. Parsing individuals by sex revealed how community structures are dominated by few members and differ between male and female ticks.

Region and sex are both significant drivers of alpha diversity A. americanum

We estimated several alpha diversity indices for each sample (S3 File) but given the dominance of relatively few community members in most samples (Fig 1), we chose to focus on the Gini-Simpson index. Communities were mostly low in diversity and both region and sex were significant, non-interacting, predictors of Gini-Simpson indices (ANOVA following GLM p = 0.002 for region; p = 2.2e-16 for sex). NE ticks harbored significantly more diverse communities when compared to those from the HC and MW (Tukey’s HSD p values of 0.01 and 0.006 respectively) but were no different than samples from W (Fig 2A). Communities associated with male ticks were more diverse than those in females (ANOVA p <0.005) (Fig 3B).

10.1371/journal.pone.0304959.g002 Fig 2 Alpha diversity in bacterial communities associated with A. americanum significantly differ between region and sex.

Within-sample diversity, measured as the Gini-Simpson diversity index, was higher in A. americanum ticks from the NE (Northeast) region when compared to HC (Historic range) and MW (Midwest) ticks (A) (Tukey’s HSD pNevs.HC = 0.01 and pNevs.MW = 0.006). Between sex comparison (B) revealed male-associated communities were significantly more diverse than female communities (ANOVA p<0.05). Sample sizes for each region are: Historic range (HC; n = 129); Northeast (NE; n = 27); Midwest (MW; n = 12); West (W; n = 21). Sample sizes for each sex are: females (F; n = 98); males (M; n = 91). Mean values are depicted by the thick back lines for each boxplot.

10.1371/journal.pone.0304959.g003 Fig 3 Bacterial community structures of ticks from the west region are significantly different from historic range in both male and female ticks.

Ordination analysis (PCoA) based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarities among female (A) and male (B) ticks show how ticks collected in the West clustered separately from the other 3 regions predominantly along the horizontal axis (PCoA1) where the largest variances where represented (33.1% for females; 22.5 for males). Centroids for each geographic region and standard deviation ellipses follow the color code in the legend, with abbreviations representing regions as follows: HC = Historic range; MW = Midwest; NE = Northeast; and W = West. PERMANOVA analysis showed that tick sex (p = 1 x 10−5 R2 = 0.2018) and region (p = 1 x 10−5 R2 = 0.0569) significantly drive beta diversity (Table 2). Pairwise PERMANOVA tests (Table 3) revealed that for both tick sexes, W was significantly different from HC (p = 0.001, R2 = 0.1107 for females; p = 0.001, R2 = 0.0737 for males). W was also significantly different from the other two regions in both sexes except for the W vs NE comparison in females (p = 0.1470, R2 = 0.0698 as shown in Table 3).

Community structures associated with A. americanum ticks collected in the west significantly differ from those collected in the historic range

PERMANOVA analysis based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarities revealed that dissimilarities between tick samples can be partially attributed to the significant (and non-interacting) effect of both region and sex (Table 2). As in the case of alpha diversity, community structures in A. americanum and other tick models may reflect physiological and life history differences between males and females. Therefore, we split the data set by sex and explored if the clustering profiles reflected the known range expansion of A. americanum. As observed in both females (Fig 3A) and males (Fig 3B), W ticks had a community structure that positioned them along the PCoA dimension1 separately from the other 3 regions which closely co-localize predominantly to the left of the zero axis. A pairwise PERMANOVA (Table 3) showed that ticks of both sexes collected at W were significantly different from the ones collected at HC (p = 0.001, R2 = 0.1107 for females; p = 0.001, R2 = 0.0737 for males). In addition, bacterial community structures of western ticks (females and males) were significantly different from all other regions except for W vs NE in females. Pairwise comparisons between HC, NE, and MW were non-significant (Table 3).

10.1371/journal.pone.0304959.t002 Table 2 PERMANOVA assessing the association between beta diversity (quantified by Bray-Curtis dissimilarities) and explanatory variables representing region and sex.

Explanatory variable	R2	p—value	
Region	0.0569	<1e-05	
Sex	0.2018	<1e-05	
Residuals	0.7411		
Total	1.0000		

10.1371/journal.pone.0304959.t003 Table 3 Pairwise PERMANOVA assessing the significance of the Bray-Curtis dissimilarities between ticks of the same sex when comparing W against the other regions of origin.

Compared regions	R2	p—value	
Females			
W vs HC	0.1107	0.001	
W vs MW	0.1318	0.044	
W vs NE	0.0698	0.147	
Males			
W vs HC	0.0737	0.001	
W vs MW	0.1639	0.029	
W vs NE	0.1238	0.020	

Multiple indicator taxa (ASVs) of bacterial communities associated with tick sex or region

Both region and sex significantly drove dissimilarities between bacterial community structures. When comparing the regions of origin of the ticks (Fig 4A), 38 biomarkers were identified. From them, 36 were associated with ticks from W, and only one biomarker was identified for each of the MW and NE regions. No indicator ASVs were identified for Historic range samples. The predominant Phylum among the indicators was p__Protebacteria. In ticks from W, indicator ASVs were assigned to p__Proteobacteria (n = 27), p__Bacteroidetes (n = 7), p__Acidobacteria (n = 1), and p__Verrucomicrobiota (n = 1). Taxonomically, these ASVs represent 11 bacterial families (Fig 4A). In the case of MW and NE ticks, their only biomarkers were identified as p__Proteobacteria, o__Rickettsiales and p__Proteobacteria, f__Rickettsiaceae respectively (Fig 4A). Most marker ASVs were of low relative abundance (< 1%) except NE marker ASV2, which had a relative abundance of 12.23%. The ASV with the highest indicstat (0.66, p = 0.001) was an indicator for the West and was identified as f__Sphingomonadaceae. When comparing between tick sex (Fig 4B), we found 224 indicator species associated with male ticks and only one associated with females. For males, we plotted the first 24 with an indicator statistic (indicstat) > 0.80 and for females we plotted the sole indicator ASV identified (indicstat = 0.30). From the 25 reported biomarkers in Fig 4B, 23 of those associated with male ticks were assigned to p__Proteobacteria and one identified as p__Actinobacteria. The only indicator ASV reported for female ticks was identified as p__Acidobacteria. All the by-sex biomarkers had a low relative abundance in the dataset (relative abundances < 0.2%).

10.1371/journal.pone.0304959.g004 Fig 4 Multiple taxa are significantly associated with the western region and male ticks.

Indicator analyses identified ASVs which were significantly associated with region (A), or sex (B). 36 region-specific biomarkers were associated with ticks collected in the W region, and one biomarker was identified for each of the NE and MW regions. 24 sex-specific biomarkers were associated with male ticks, whereas only one was associated with females. The relative abundance of each indicator ASV is shown by marker size, and their respective taxonomic affiliation is indicated by color code in each figure legend.

Significant spatial autocorrelation reveals the effect of geographic distance on community dissimilarities

We used a Mantel correlogram to assess autocorrelation between Bray-Curtis pairwise dissimilarities and geospatial distances among individual ticks parsed by sex (Fig 5A females; 5B males). At low distances values, the correlogram showed a significantly positive Mantel correlation (p < 0.005 after progressive Bonferroni corrections) for both sexes, indicating that ticks collected in proximal sites had similar bacterial communities (i.e., lower Bray-Curtis dissimilarity values) (opaque circles, Fig 5A and 5B). As distance increased, we qualitatively observed a “bumpy” or irregular trend towards negative correlations. We estimated more significant negative than positive correlations for both sexes at higher distance values, suggesting that the farther away the ticks were spatially, the more dissimilar their community structures measured. However, this pattern was more obvious in females, where 4 out of 6 negative correlations are significant (Fig 5A) than in males, where only 2 out of 6 negative correlations are significant (Fig 5B). The alternating pattern of positive and negative correlations for both sexes also suggests that environmental effects (or gradients) other than geographical distance may be influencing the community spatial structuring.

10.1371/journal.pone.0304959.g005 Fig 5 Microbial communities become significantly more dissimilar with increasing geographic distance.

Mantel correlograms show relationships between Bray-Curtis dissimilarities and geographic distances among females (A) and males (B). Distance classes along the x axis are bins following the Sturges equation. Dark symbols represent significant Mantel statistics after progressive Bonferroni corrections (p < 0.05). Positive and negative correlation values indicate positive and negative relationships between Bray-Curtis values and geographic distances, respectively. Linear trendlines were added for visual purposes to highlight the nature of the correlations as distance classes increased.

Deterministic and stochastic ecological processes influence bacterial community assemblies

We quantified the relative effect of ecological processes (niche-driven or stochastic), structuring the bacterial communities associated with female and male ticks (Fig 6). Null model and phylogenetic turnover analyses revealed that for both sexes, non-selective processes (drift and dispersal) had a more prevalent role. Drift accounted for 88.11% and 85.90% of the detected effects, respectively. For both sexes, dispersal limitation was the second largest component making up 11.23% in females and 12.96% in males. Homogeneous dispersal was detected only in male ticks, making up 1.03% of the forces shaping community structure. In sum, the largest proportions were assigned to stochastic processes which accounted for 99.34% in females and 99.91% in males. Deterministic processes were only detected in low values for both sexes, being attributed to homogeneous selection (0.66% in females and 0.09% in males). These low values suggest that niche-driven processes have a limited effect on shaping the composition of male and female associated microbiota in the geographic and temporal scales that our dataset represents.

10.1371/journal.pone.0304959.g006 Fig 6 Stochasticity coupled with dispersal limitation are the main drivers of microbiota dissimilarities among individuals within sexes.

Relative contribution of assembling processes structuring bacterial communities in female (beige) and male (violet) ticks. Dot sizes indicate the percentage of community turnover assigned to each type of process in agreement with the criteria presented by [97] to interpret the values of β-NTI and RCBray. In both female and male ticks, community turnover is predominately influenced by drift coupled with dispersal limitation.

Molecular detection of tick-borne pathogens (TBPs)

We performed molecular diagnoses of E. chaffeensis, E. ewingii, R. rickettsii and A. phagocytophilum on 235 samples (S5 File). 158 of these samples were also included in the microbiota study. No samples from the Midwest were tested. In the complete dataset we found that prevalence of E. chaffeensis, E. ewingii, and A. phagocytophilum ranged from 3.40–5.11% and we failed to detect R. rickettsii in any sample (Table 4). When split by region, we detected A. phagocytophilum only in the Historic region (Table 4). When considering their locality of origin, we highlight the detection of a A. phagocytophilum cluster as from the 15 samples collected at Noxubee County, Mississippi, 9 were found positive for this pathogen. Moreso, one of the samples was co-infected with E. chaffeensis and A. phagocytophilum. One of the initial goals of this study was to test if bacterial community structures could predict the presence of one or multiple TBPs in A. americanum as attempted in other tick models with similar datasets [30]. However, given the low number of infected individuals, machine learning methods could not be executed reliably, and we were unable to perform this analysis. Though not our original goal, we executed a GLM analysis to evaluate if the pathogen presence was driven by region. No significant effects were detected when making by-region pairwise comparisons for each pathogen (S6 File).

10.1371/journal.pone.0304959.t004 Table 4 Pathogen percent prevalence determined by qPCR analyses.

	HC
n = 150	MW
n = 0*	NE
n = 43	W
n = 42	Global
n = 235	
E. chaffeensis	4.67	N/A	6.98	4.76	5.11	
E. ewingii	2.67	N/A	4.65	4.76	3.40	
R. rickettsii	0.00	N/A	0.00	0.00	0.00	
A. phagocytophilum	7.33	N/A	0.00	0.00	4.68	
*All genomic material was consumed during HTS

Discussion

Our previous study suggested that A. americanum’s range expansion may be too recent to produce significant phylogenetic evidence, although lower levels of genetic diversity were overall observed along the edges of the distributional ranges [18]. In that work, we also found supporting evidence for a re-colonization scenario of the NE area, rather than an expansion as in the other regions. In the present study, we took an integrative ‘omics approach [106] to further explore those demographic processes in A. americanum, with a focus on the microbiota. For both adult female and male ticks, our bacterial community analyses revealed significant spatial structuring driven by distance, particularly at the western front of expansion. The community composition snapshots also enabled us to quantify ecological processes suggestive of bacterial communities associated with hosts under geographic isolation.

Consistent with previous studies, we found that A. americanum harbors a bacterial community dominated by the endosymbiotic bacteria Coxiella [44, 103, 107–111]. Our samples generally had uneven community profiles, i.e., low richness with the majority of counts from only a few members. This diversity trend agrees with previous findings [104, 108–111] though variable numbers of observed operational taxonomic units (OTUs) are reported. Overall richness variability may be due to differences in the surface sterilization protocols which could impact measured diversity [112].

Inter-regional comparisons of the within-sample (alpha) diversity showed that Northeast ticks harbored slightly more diverse bacterial communities than individuals from the Historic range and Midwest, but not from the West. Thus, the richest communities are present in a current expansion area (W) and a region that was re-colonized by populations of this species (NE) [18]. Region has been found to be a significant driver of alpha diversity in other ticks, including I. ricinus, D. variabilis, and D. reticulatus [57, 113, 114]. Duncan et al. [114] found D. variabilis individuals from the Northeast USA to have a higher richness than those from the Midwest, South, and West populations. In their study, ticks from the West had the lowest richness and were geographically isolated from the other populations. Interestingly, in D. reticulatus ticks, females but not males showed regional differences in alpha diversity [113]. Thus, it is important to assess the relationship between region and sex when studying tick microbiota spatial dynamics. We showed that female ticks had significantly lower alpha diversity than males, as has been previously reported in multiple tick species including A. americanum [30, 57, 105, 109, 110, 114]. It is likely that the high relative abundance of Coxiella in females compared to males is driving this finding in our study. Coxiella is transovarially transmitted [115] in A. americanum. It is possible this inheritance mechanism underlies the dominance of Coxiella in female-associated microbial communities, but this requires further study [116].

Spatial structure, i.e., microbial community membership and abundance profiles influenced by geographic origin, has been reported in several ixodid ticks encompassing both short and wide ranges [29, 31–35, 117, 118]. Likewise, sex has also been reported as a significant driver of beta diversity [30, 35, 51, 113]. We found significant spatial structuring in our samples, and this was similar for both male and female ticks. Western ticks significantly differed from the other regions, except for the female W vs NE comparison. A similar study of D. variabilis in the U.S.A found male and female adult western ticks had significantly different community structures from ticks collected in the Northeast, Midwest, and South [114]. In D. reticulatus, beta diversity variance was driven by geographic origin but only in females [113]. This is in contrast to our study where we detected significant spatial structuring for both sexes.

We also identified differentially abundant and prevalent bacterial taxa driving tick microbiota community structures. We detected non-o__Rickettsiales p__Proteobacteria as predominant biomarkers of western ticks, whereas the single markers for the northeastern and midwestern ticks were ASVs identified as o__Rickettsiales. Whether the association of o__Rickettsiales ASVs with the North and Midwest populations is relevant to understanding A. americanum’s TBD ecology is unknown, though our qPCR analysis reveals with a high degree of certainty that these ASVs are not R. rickettsii. Nevertheless, given the recent reports of predicted negative and positive interactions between pathogenic taxa and the host microbiota [51, 119], we believe further studies are warranted. There was a clear imbalance in the number of biomarkers among regions, and we speculate two potential causes of this phenomenon: environmental similarities and the time scale of the range expansion. Ticks moving westward could have encountered a wider set of environmental and climatic variables, versus perhaps more homogeneous landscapes among the other three regions. As mentioned above, soil and habitat act as determinants of bacterial diversity [26], including in A. americanum [31, 120]. As ticks spend most of their life in the leaf litter off their host, this environment would significantly structure their microbiota. Host species can also influence tick microbial community composition [121, 122]. Host usage by ticks moving West might differ from that of the Historic range resulting in new bacterial members or alteration of their microbial community structure. It is also possible that the imbalance in biomarkers is an artifact of temporally dynamic community assemblage [36]. The extent to which the differentially abundant taxa we identified are long-term symbionts of the western population or merely transient associations in this moving population is a question that requires more elaborate experiments.

The indicator taxa analysis also revealed a clear overrepresentation of taxa associated with male ticks. A skewed ratio of biomarkers discriminating male from female A. americanum was also reported by Trout Fryxell and De Bruyn [31] who, similarly, reported Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria ASVs as male markers. Physiological, metabolic, and life history differences between sexes may underlie this observation. For instance, male ticks are more likely to take smaller blood meals from several different host types and are more likely to have a broader home range compared to females. Therefore, males may develop stable associations with a wider variety of microorganisms than their female counterparts [57, 114]. We hypothesize that both sex and region biomarkers are reflecting tick movement through space but may also enable it. For instance, bacteria have been associated with migration in birds [123, 124] and temperature tolerant strains of fungi can facilitate range expansion in Atta texana ants [125]. In ticks, bacterial members of the microbiome have been shown to influence locomotion [126] generally increasing tick mobility [37]. Whether western ticks in our study incorporated movement-beneficial symbionts, or these bacterial taxa merely depict transient associations is a question that requires more elaborate experiments.

Correlograms for both sexes revealed a negative trend, suggesting that bacterial profiles are more different between ticks as they become more geographically distant from each other. This is consistent with previous findings in Ixodes ticks collected along the east coast of the U.S.A. [30]. However, we also note alternating (“bumpy”) patterns in both male and female correlograms. Mostly negative but also positive, significant correlations, suggest that profile dissimilarities are not only influenced by physical distances but could also be driven by other factors such as topographical features (mountain ranges, cliffs, basins) and vegetation gradients [87, 95]. For instance, similarity in topology and climate would make it possible for physically distant ticks to possess similar microbiota when in resembling environmental conditions, and vice versa. A similar diversity to distance relationship exists in microbial communities from North and South pole water samples; given their similar habitat conditions, physical distance had no effect on community turnover [127].

We further quantified ecological processes shaping bacterial community assembly [57, 97]. We found that both deterministic and stochastic forces shaped the microbiota turnover in male and female A. americanum ticks but that low levels of dispersal limitation (constrained exchange of bacteria among local host communities) in combination with drift were the predominant forces. This, in accordance with Vellend’s framework [99, 128], implies that dispersal limitation enables drift (or weak selection) to cause turnover in community structures [97, 129]. The coupling of these two forces is congruent with bacterial communities associated with geographically isolated hosts. Given our results, this could be predominantly occurring in ticks from the West, but our analysis did not specifically evaluate this question. More balanced sample sizes at the expansion edges would strengthen conclusions inferred from ecological process quantification when evaluating range expansion [57].

Lastly, we performed pathogen detection in the ticks. Our intent was to determine if bacterial community composition could be predictive of pathogen presence, but the pathogen prevalence in our samples proved insufficient to execute supervised learning analysis. It is worth noting that Trout Fryxell and De Bruyn [31] reported no significant effect of Ehrlichia or Anaplasma presence (PCR detected) on A. americanum microbial community structures. In our dataset, the overall prevalence of E. chaffeensis and E. ewingii were similar to those previously reported [3, 130]. Future studies to evaluate predictive relationships between pathogens and microbiota structure may require larger sample sizes or targeted sampling in areas of high prevalence to ensure sufficient data.

In our previous study investigating genetic signatures of range expansion in A. americanum, we did not detect evidence of geographic isolation [18]. Using the same samples, we investigated their associated microbial communities. We detected significant bacterial community turnover in the western expansion front potentially driven by physical distance and/or environmental differences, which recapitulated the known pattern of recent expansion and suggested potential geographic isolation, at least for the western front. Ecological processes shaping the community assemblage further support the value of microbial ecology as a relevant data layer for vector biogeographical studies. Given that the tick-microbiome-pathogen triad is far from being understood, further studies are warranted to inform control strategies of TBDs as vectors expand their range accompanied and potentially enabled by their bacterial symbionts.

Supporting information

S1 File Table S1: Sample metadata.

(TXT)

S2 File R script: Tick_microbiota.

(R)

S3 File Table S3: Alpha diversity indices.

(TXT)

S4 File Real time PCR primers and probes for pathogen detection.

(DOCX)

S5 File Table S5: Pathogen detection.

(CSV)

S6 File R output: GLM_effect of region on infection status.

(TXT)

We are grateful to Jerome Goddard, Howard Ginsberg, Andrew Hoffman, Benedict Pagac, Graham Hickling, Solny Adalsteinsson, Bruce Noden, Brent Newman, Jim Occi, Shelby Ford, Renn Tumlison, and Lance Durden who provided some of the tick specimens used in this study. We also thank The National Ecological Observatory Network, a program sponsored by the National Science Foundation and operated under cooperative agreement by Battelle Memorial Institute, for providing some specimens used in this work. In addition, we thank Lorenza Beati, curator of the USNTC for the tick records.

10.1371/journal.pone.0304959.r001
Decision Letter 0
abuowarda Mai Academic Editor
© 2024 Mai abuowarda
2024
Mai abuowarda
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
Submission Version0
19 Jan 2024

PONE-D-23-34044The microbiota of Amblyomma americanum reflects known westward expansionPLOS ONE

Dear Dr. Short,

Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.

Please submit your revised manuscript by Mar 04 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.

Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.

A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.

An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.

If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.

We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.

Kind regards,

Mai abuowarda

Academic Editor

PLOS ONE

Journal requirements:

When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.

1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. Note from Emily Chenette, Editor in Chief of PLOS ONE, and Iain Hrynaszkiewicz, Director of Open Research Solutions at PLOS: Did you know that depositing data in a repository is associated with up to a 25% citation advantage (https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230416)? If you’ve not already done so, consider depositing your raw data in a repository to ensure your work is read, appreciated and cited by the largest possible audience. You’ll also earn an Accessible Data icon on your published paper if you deposit your data in any participating repository (https://plos.org/open-science/open-data/#accessible-data).

3. In your Methods section, please provide additional information regarding the permits you obtained for the work. Please ensure you have included the full name of the authority that approved the field site access and, if no permits were required, a brief statement explaining why.

4. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure:

“LM and SMS were supported by the Ohio State University Infectious Diseases Institute (https://idi.osu.edu/) and the Ohio State University College of Food, Agricultural, and Environmental Sciences (https://cfaes.osu.edu/). RP, SW, and CC were supported by the Ohio State University College of Food, Agricultural, and Environmental Sciences (https://cfaes.osu.edu/) and the Ohio State University College of Veterinary Medicine (https://vet.osu.edu).”

Please state what role the funders took in the study.  If the funders had no role, please state: "The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript."

If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed.

Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.

5. We note that Figure 1 in your submission contain [map/satellite] images which may be copyrighted. All PLOS content is published under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which means that the manuscript, images, and Supporting Information files will be freely available online, and any third party is permitted to access, download, copy, distribute, and use these materials in any way, even commercially, with proper attribution. For these reasons, we cannot publish previously copyrighted maps or satellite images created using proprietary data, such as Google software (Google Maps, Street View, and Earth). For more information, see our copyright guidelines: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/licenses-and-copyright.

We require you to either (1) present written permission from the copyright holder to publish these figures specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license, or (2) remove the figures from your submission:

1. You may seek permission from the original copyright holder of Figure 1 to publish the content specifically under the CC BY 4.0 license. 

We recommend that you contact the original copyright holder with the Content Permission Form (http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=7c09/content-permission-form.pdf) and the following text:

“I request permission for the open-access journal PLOS ONE to publish XXX under the Creative Commons Attribution License (CCAL) CC BY 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Please be aware that this license allows unrestricted use and distribution, even commercially, by third parties. Please reply and provide explicit written permission to publish XXX under a CC BY license and complete the attached form.”

Please upload the completed Content Permission Form or other proof of granted permissions as an "Other" file with your submission.

In the figure caption of the copyrighted figure, please include the following text: “Reprinted from [ref] under a CC BY license, with permission from [name of publisher], original copyright [original copyright year].”

 2. If you are unable to obtain permission from the original copyright holder to publish these figures under the CC BY 4.0 license or if the copyright holder’s requirements are incompatible with the CC BY 4.0 license, please either i) remove the figure or ii) supply a replacement figure that complies with the CC BY 4.0 license. Please check copyright information on all replacement figures and update the figure caption with source information. If applicable, please specify in the figure caption text when a figure is similar but not identical to the original image and is therefore for illustrative purposes only.

The following resources for replacing copyrighted map figures may be helpful:

USGS National Map Viewer (public domain): http://viewer.nationalmap.gov/viewer/

The Gateway to Astronaut Photography of Earth (public domain): http://eol.jsc.nasa.gov/sseop/clickmap/

Maps at the CIA (public domain): https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/index.html and https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/cia-maps-publications/index.html

NASA Earth Observatory (public domain): http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/

Landsat: http://landsat.visibleearth.nasa.gov/

USGS EROS (Earth Resources Observatory and Science (EROS) Center) (public domain): http://eros.usgs.gov/#

Natural Earth (public domain): http://www.naturalearthdata.com/

[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]

Reviewers' comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?

The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.

Reviewer #1: Yes

Reviewer #2: Yes

**********

2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?

Reviewer #1: Yes

Reviewer #2: Yes

**********

3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.

Reviewer #1: Yes

Reviewer #2: Yes

**********

4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?

PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.

Reviewer #1: Yes

Reviewer #2: Yes

**********

5. Review Comments to the Author

Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)

Reviewer #1: The manuscript details original research on the spatial structuring of microbiota in female and male Amblyoma populations across expanded and historic ranges. The manuscript effectively uses proper English, addressing relevant questions and objectives to provide answers. I have pointed out two minor corrections that are highlighted in the text.

Reviewer #2: Overall, the manucript titled “The microbiota of Amblyomma americanum reflects known westward expansion” is an interesting study describing microbiota of Amblyomma americanum in some region of united states.

The manuscript should be revised by the authors in order to be published. I addressed some point below line by line.

The manuscript is definitely too long, thus I suggest shortening it by cutting some parts on the too detailed paragraphs (best of speech is the short and informative one (.

Title

The title is ambiguous and needs more clarification. What does the word (westward expansion) refer to?

Abstract

The abstract must involve the tick borne pathogens that determined by researchers

Introduction

Line 55: it is preferred to replace “driver” with -----motivation

Line 56: geographic range expansion---to-----geographic distribution

Line 73: You could have mentioned briefly the functional roles of the tick microbiota

Materials and Methods

Line 117: 189 A. americanum specimens collected at 24 localities, this number is too small. You can describe your limitation and difficulties to obtain more samples.

Line 148: Mention the active ingredient of bleach in parentheses.

Line 146: you are mentioned “we extracted genomic DNA from each individual tick” , This contradicts your statement “Ticks, randomly chosen, were surface”, so you must replace the second sentence with “all ticks sterilized with ……

Line 152: ATL----- Write the full name and abbreviation in parentheses

Line 157-176; line 293-303: I suggest making small table including gene, Primer type, Primer sequence, PCR product size (base pair), thermocycling conditions, References for each primer

Line 177: Bioinformatic analyses--- Authors should rephrase this section so that it is clear and concise

Results

Line 323, 324: must be written in discussion

Fig 2: it is preferred to be changed with good clear colors and resolution, so that the readers can recognize the details of the figure easily.

Fig. 3: the meaning of the abbreviated letters must be written on the figure as fig.4

Line 364: please write abbreviation in parentheses as example (W- region) or any other format to avoid the confusion with other words ---within whole manuscript

Discussion

Line 541; structuring—to ---structure

Line 587, 587; reformulate the sentence

**********

6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.

If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.

Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.

Reviewer #1: Yes: Idika kalu Idika

Reviewer #2: No

**********

[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.

Attachment Submitted filename: PONE-D-23-34044_reviewer v2.pdf

Attachment Submitted filename: Author responce Amblyomma americanum.docx

10.1371/journal.pone.0304959.r002
Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
11 Apr 2024

Response to reviewers has been uploaded in the attached documents section.

Attachment Submitted filename: Response to reviewers PONE_013124.docx

10.1371/journal.pone.0304959.r003
Decision Letter 1
abuowarda Mai Academic Editor
© 2024 Mai abuowarda
2024
Mai abuowarda
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
Submission Version1
22 May 2024

The microbiota of Amblyomma americanum reflects known westward expansion

PONE-D-23-34044R1

Dear Dr. Short,

We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.

Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.

An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.

If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.

Kind regards,

Mai abuowarda

Academic Editor

PLOS ONE

Additional Editor Comments (optional):

Reviewers' comments:

Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.

Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed

Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed

**********

2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?

The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.

Reviewer #1: Yes

Reviewer #2: Yes

**********

3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?

Reviewer #1: Yes

Reviewer #2: Yes

**********

4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?

The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.

Reviewer #1: Yes

Reviewer #2: Yes

**********

5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?

PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.

Reviewer #1: Yes

Reviewer #2: Yes

**********

6. Review Comments to the Author

Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)

Reviewer #1: The manuscript details original research on the spatial structuring of microbiota in female and male Amblyoma populations across expanded and historic ranges. The manuscript effectively uses proper English, addressing relevant questions and objectives to provide answers. I believe the manuscript is in good shape to be accepted for publication

Reviewer #2: All reviewer comments are addressed in revised manuscript xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

**********

7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.

If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.

Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.

Reviewer #1: Yes: Idika Ik

Reviewer #2: No

**********

10.1371/journal.pone.0304959.r004
Acceptance letter
abuowarda Mai Academic Editor
© 2024 Mai abuowarda
2024
Mai abuowarda
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
30 May 2024

PONE-D-23-34044R1

PLOS ONE

Dear Dr. Short,

I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.

At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:

* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited

* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,

* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset

If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.

Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.

If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.

Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.

Kind regards,

PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff

on behalf of

dr Mai abuowarda

Academic Editor

PLOS ONE
==== Refs
References

1 Rosenberg R , Lindsey NP , Fischer M , Gregory CJ , Hinckley AF , Mead PS , et al . Vital Signs: Trends in Reported Vectorborne Disease Cases—United States and Territories, 2004–2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2018 May 4;67 (17 ):496–501. doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6717e1 29723166
2 Sonenshine D. Range Expansion of Tick Disease Vectors in North America: Implications for Spread of Tick-Borne Disease. IJERPH. 2018 Mar 9;15 (3 ):478. doi: 10.3390/ijerph15030478 29522469
3 Sanchez-Vicente S , Tagliafierro T , Coleman JL , Benach JL , Tokarz R . Polymicrobial Nature of Tick-Borne Diseases. mBio. 2019 Sep 10;10 (5 ):e02055–19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02055-19 31506314
4 Hair J , Bowman J . Behavioral ecology of Amblyomma americanum. In: Morphology, physiology, and behavioral biology of ticks. John Wiley & Sons Inc; 1986. p. 406–27.
5 Cortinas R , Spomer S . Lone Star Tick (Acari: Ixodidae) Occurrence in Nebraska: Historical and Current Perspectives. jnl med entom. 2013 Mar 1;50 (2 ):244–51. doi: 10.1603/me12207 23540110
6 Barrett AW , Noden BH , Gruntmeir JM , Holland T , Mitcham JR , Martin JE , et al . County Scale Distribution of Amblyomma americanum (Ixodida: Ixodidae) in Oklahoma: Addressing Local Deficits in Tick Maps Based on Passive Reporting. Journal of Medical Entomology. 2015 Mar 1;52 (2 ):269–73.26336311
7 Monzón JD , Atkinson EG , Henn BM , Benach JL . Population and Evolutionary Genomics of Amblyomma americanum, an Expanding Arthropod Disease Vector. Genome Biol Evol. 2016 May 12;8 (5 ):1351–60.27190204
8 Lindquist EE , Wu KW , Flahey B . A handbook to the ticks of Canada (Ixodida: Ixodidae, Argasidae). Ottawa, Ont.: Biological Survey of Canada; 2016.
9 Reiter P. Climate change and mosquito-borne disease. Environmental Health Perspectives. 2001 Mar;109 (suppl 1 ):141–61. doi: 10.1289/ehp.01109s1141 11250812
10 Ogden NH . Climate change and vector-borne diseases of public health significance. FEMS Microbiology Letters [Internet]. 2017 Oct 16 [cited 2023 Feb 2];364 (19 ). Available from: https://academic.oup.com/femsle/article/doi/10.1093/femsle/fnx186/4107775 28957457
11 Ryan SJ , Carlson CJ , Mordecai EA , Johnson LR . Global expansion and redistribution of Aedes-borne virus transmission risk with climate change. PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases. 2019 Mar 28;13 (3 ):e0007213. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0007213 30921321
12 Swei A , Couper LI , Coffey LL , Kapan D , Bennett S . Patterns, Drivers, and Challenges of Vector-Borne Disease Emergence. Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases. 2020 Mar 1;20 (3 ):159–70. doi: 10.1089/vbz.2018.2432 31800374
13 Fischlin A , Midgley G , Price J . Ecosystems, their properties, goods, and services. In: Climate change 2007: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability: contribution of Working Group II to the fourth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press; 2007. p. 211–72.
14 Ludwig A , Ginsberg HS , Hickling GJ , Ogden NH . A Dynamic Population Model to Investigate Effects of Climate and Climate-Independent Factors on the Lifecycle of Amblyomma americanum (Acari: Ixodidae). J Med Entomol. 2016 Jan;53 (1 ):99–115.26502753
15 Bouchard C , Dibernardo A , Koffi J , Wood H , Leighton P , Lindsay L . Increased risk of tick-borne diseases with climate and environmental changes. CCDR. 2019 Apr 4;45 (4 ):83–9.31285697
16 MacDonald AJ , McComb S , O’Neill C , Padgett KA , Larsen AE . Projected climate and land use change alter western blacklegged tick phenology, seasonal host‐seeking suitability and human encounter risk in California. Glob Change Biol. 2020 Oct;26 (10 ):5459–74. doi: 10.1111/gcb.15269 32649017
17 O’Neill X , White A , Gortázar C , Ruiz-Fons F . The Impact of Host Abundance on the Epidemiology of Tick-Borne Infection. Bull Math Biol. 2023 Apr;85 (4 ):30. doi: 10.1007/s11538-023-01133-8 36892680
18 Lado P , Smith ML , Carstens BC , Klompen H . Population genetic structure and demographic history of the lone star tick, Amblyomma americanum (Ixodida: Ixodidae): New evidence supporting old records. Molecular Ecology. 2020;29 (15 ):2810–23.32574413
19 Rochlin I , Egizi A , Lindström A . The Original Scientific Description of the Lone Star Tick (Amblyomma americanum, Acari: Ixodidae) and Implications for the Species’ Past and Future Geographic Distributions. Hamer S , editor. Journal of Medical Entomology. 2022 Mar 16;59 (2 ):412–20.35024845
20 Rochlin I , Egizi A , Ginsberg HS . Modeling of historical and current distributions of lone star tick, Amblyomma americanum (Acari: Ixodidae), is consistent with ancestral range recovery. Exp Appl Acarol. 2023 Jan;89 (1 ):85–103.36482230
21 LoGiudice K , Ostfeld RS , Schmidt KA , Keesing F . The ecology of infectious disease: Effects of host diversity and community composition on Lyme disease risk. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003 Jan 21;100 (2 ):567–71. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0233733100 12525705
22 Tack W , Madder M , Baeten L , Vanhellemont M , Gruwez R , Verheyen K . Local habitat and landscape affect Ixodes ricinus tick abundances in forests on poor, sandy soils. Forest Ecology and Management. 2012 Feb;265 :30–6.
23 Perez G , Bastian S , Agoulon A , Bouju A , Durand A , Faille F , et al . Effect of landscape features on the relationship between Ixodes ricinus ticks and their small mammal hosts. Parasites Vectors. 2016 Dec;9 (1 ):20.26767788
24 Ehrmann S , Liira J , Gärtner S , Hansen K , Brunet J , Cousins SAO , et al . Environmental drivers of Ixodes ricinus abundance in forest fragments of rural European landscapes. BMC Ecol. 2017 Dec;17 (1 ):31.28874197
25 Lemoine M , Cornetti L , Reeh K , Tschirren B . Tick range expansion to higher elevations: does Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato facilitate the colonisation of marginal habitats? BMC Ecol Evo. 2022 Aug 26;22 (1 ):104.
26 Greay TL , Gofton AW , Paparini A , Ryan UM , Oskam CL , Irwin PJ . Recent insights into the tick microbiome gained through next-generation sequencing. Parasit Vectors. 2018 Jan 4;11 (1 ):12. doi: 10.1186/s13071-017-2550-5 29301588
27 Narasimhan S , Swei A , Abouneameh S , Pal U , Pedra JHF , Fikrig E . Grappling with the tick microbiome. Trends in Parasitology. 2021 Aug 1;37 (8 ):722–33. doi: 10.1016/j.pt.2021.04.004 33962878
28 Wu-Chuang A , Hodžić A , Mateos-Hernández L , Estrada-Peña A , Obregon D , Cabezas-Cruz A . Current debates and advances in tick microbiome research. Current Research in Parasitology & Vector-Borne Diseases. 2021 Jan 1;1 :100036. doi: 10.1016/j.crpvbd.2021.100036 35284884
29 Carpi G , Cagnacci F , Wittekindt NE , Zhao F , Qi J , Tomsho LP , et al . Metagenomic Profile of the Bacterial Communities Associated with Ixodes ricinus Ticks. Li W , editor. PLoS ONE. 2011 Oct 13;6 (10 ):e25604.22022422
30 Van Treuren W , Ponnusamy L , Brinkerhoff RJ , Gonzalez A , Parobek CM , Juliano JJ , et al . Variation in the Microbiota of Ixodes Ticks with Regard to Geography, Species, and Sex. Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 2015 Sep 15;81 (18 ):6200–9.26150449
31 Trout Fryxell RT , DeBruyn JM . The Microbiome of Ehrlichia-Infected and Uninfected Lone Star Ticks (Amblyomma americanum). PLoS ONE. 2016;11 (1 ):e0146651.26751816
32 Gall CA , Scoles GA , Magori K , Mason KL , Brayton KA . Laboratory colonization stabilizes the naturally dynamic microbiome composition of field collected Dermacentor andersoni ticks. Microbiome. 2017 Dec;5 (1 ):133.28978338
33 Clow KM , Weese JS , Rousseau J , Jardine CM . Microbiota of field-collected Ixodes scapularis and Dermacentor variabilis from eastern and southern Ontario, Canada. Ticks and Tick-borne Diseases. 2018 Feb;9 (2 ):235–44.29042239
34 Chandra S , Šlapeta J . Biotic Factors Influence Microbiota of Nymph Ticks from Vegetation in Sydney, Australia. Pathogens. 2020 Jul 13;9 (7 ):566. doi: 10.3390/pathogens9070566 32668699
35 Lado P , Luan B , Allerdice MEJ , Paddock CD , Karpathy SE , Klompen H . Integrating population genetic structure, microbiome, and pathogens presence data in Dermacentor variabilis. PeerJ. 2020 Jul 7;8 :e9367.32704442
36 Pollet T , Sprong H , Lejal E , Krawczyk AI , Moutailler S , Cosson JF , et al . The scale affects our view on the identification and distribution of microbial communities in ticks. Parasites Vectors. 2020 Dec;13 (1 ):36. doi: 10.1186/s13071-020-3908-7 31964404
37 Benelli G. Pathogens Manipulating Tick Behavior—Through a Glass, Darkly. Pathogens. 2020 Aug 17;9 (8 ):664. doi: 10.3390/pathogens9080664 32824571
38 Busby AT , Ayllón N , Kocan KM , Blouin EF , De La Fuente G , Galindo RC , et al . Expression of heat shock proteins and subolesin affects stress responses, Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection and questing behaviour in the tick, Ixodes scapularis. Medical and Veterinary Entomology. 2012 Mar;26 (1 ):92–102.21781141
39 Neelakanta G , Sultana H , Fish D , Anderson JF , Fikrig E . Anaplasma phagocytophilum induces Ixodes scapularis ticks to express an antifreeze glycoprotein gene that enhances their survival in the cold. J Clin Invest. 2010 Sep 1;120 (9 ):3179–90.20739755
40 Herrmann C , Gern L . Survival of Ixodes ricinus (Acari: Ixodidae) nymphs under cold conditions is negatively influenced by frequent temperature variations. Ticks and Tick-borne Diseases. 2013 Sep;4 (5 ):445–51.23850119
41 Adams JF . Biological Half-life of Vitamin B12 in Plasma. Nature. 1963 Apr;198 (4876 ):200–200. doi: 10.1038/198200a0 14010994
42 Duron O , Gottlieb Y . Convergence of Nutritional Symbioses in Obligate Blood Feeders. Trends in Parasitology. 2020 Oct;36 (10 ):816–25. doi: 10.1016/j.pt.2020.07.007 32811753
43 Ben-Yosef M , Rot A , Mahagna M , Kapri E , Behar A , Gottlieb Y . Coxiella-Like Endosymbiont of Rhipicephalus sanguineus Is Required for Physiological Processes During Ontogeny. Front Microbiol. 2020 Apr 22;11 :493.32390951
44 Zhong J , Jasinskas A , Barbour AG . Antibiotic Treatment of the Tick Vector Amblyomma americanum Reduced Reproductive Fitness. Romesberg F , editor. PLoS ONE. 2007 May 2;2 (5 ):e405.17476327
45 Budachetri K , Kumar D , Crispell G , Beck C , Dasch G , Karim S . The tick endosymbiont Candidatus Midichloria mitochondrii and selenoproteins are essential for the growth of Rickettsia parkeri in the Gulf Coast tick vector. Microbiome. 2018 Dec;6 (1 ):141.30103809
46 Fogaça AC , Sousa G , Pavanelo DB , Esteves E , Martins LA , Urbanová V , et al . Tick Immune System: What Is Known, the Interconnections, the Gaps, and the Challenges. Front Immunol. 2021 Mar 2;12 :628054. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.628054 33737931
47 Boulanger N , Wikel S . Induced Transient Immune Tolerance in Ticks and Vertebrate Host: A Keystone of Tick-Borne Diseases? Front Immunol. 2021;12 :625993. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.625993 33643313
48 Bonnet SI , Binetruy F , Hernández-Jarguín AM , Duron O . The Tick Microbiome: Why Non-pathogenic Microorganisms Matter in Tick Biology and Pathogen Transmission. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017 Jun 8;7 :236. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00236 28642842
49 de la Fuente J , Antunes S , Bonnet S , Cabezas-Cruz A , Domingos AG , Estrada-Peña A , et al . Tick-Pathogen Interactions and Vector Competence: Identification of Molecular Drivers for Tick-Borne Diseases. Front Cell Infect Microbiol [Internet]. 2017 Apr 7 [cited 2023 Feb 1];7 . Available from: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fcimb.2017.00114/full 28439499
50 Obregón D , Bard E , Abrial D , Estrada-Peña A , Cabezas-Cruz A . Sex-Specific Linkages Between Taxonomic and Functional Profiles of Tick Gut Microbiomes. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2019 Aug 14;9 :298. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2019.00298 31475121
51 Adegoke A , Kumar D , Budachetri K , Karim S . Hematophagy and tick-borne Rickettsial pathogen shape the microbial community structure and predicted functions within the tick vector, Amblyomma maculatum. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2022 Nov 21;12 :1037387.36478675
52 Abraham NM , Liu L , Jutras BL , Yadav AK , Narasimhan S , Gopalakrishnan V , et al . Pathogen-mediated manipulation of arthropod microbiota to promote infection. PNAS. 2017 Jan 31;114 (5 ):E781–90. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1613422114 28096373
53 Cansado-Utrilla C , Zhao SY , McCall PJ , Coon KL , Hughes GL . The microbiome and mosquito vectorial capacity: rich potential for discovery and translation. Microbiome. 2021 Dec;9 (1 ):111. doi: 10.1186/s40168-021-01073-2 34006334
54 Song X , Zhong Z , Gao L , Weiss BL , Wang J . Metabolic interactions between disease-transmitting vectors and their microbiota. Trends in Parasitology. 2022 Aug;38 (8 ):697–708. doi: 10.1016/j.pt.2022.05.002 35643853
55 Excoffier L , Foll M , Petit RJ . Genetic Consequences of Range Expansions. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst. 2009 Dec 1;40 (1 ):481–501.
56 Nei M , Maruyama T , Chakraborty R . THE BOTTLENECK EFFECT AND GENETIC VARIABILITY IN POPULATIONS. Evolution. 1975 Mar;29 (1 ):1–10. doi: 10.1111/j.1558-5646.1975.tb00807.x 28563291
57 Aivelo T , Lemoine M , Tschirren B . Elevational Changes in Bacterial Microbiota Structure and Diversity in an Arthropod-Disease Vector. Microb Ecol. 2022 Oct;84 (3 ):868–78. doi: 10.1007/s00248-021-01879-5 34599659
58 Lado P , Qurollo B , Williams C , Junge R , Klompen H . The microbiome of Haemaphysalis lemuris (Acari: Ixodidae), a possible vector of pathogens of endangered lemur species in Madagascar. Ticks and Tick-borne Diseases. 2018 Jul;9 (5 ):1252–60.29754986
59 Kim D , Hofstaedter CE , Zhao C , Mattei L , Tanes C , Clarke E , et al . Optimizing methods and dodging pitfalls in microbiome research. Microbiome. 2017 Dec;5 (1 ):52. doi: 10.1186/s40168-017-0267-5 28476139
60 Walters W , Hyde ER , Berg-Lyons D , Ackermann G , Humphrey G , Parada A , et al . Improved Bacterial 16S rRNA Gene (V4 and V4-5) and Fungal Internal Transcribed Spacer Marker Gene Primers for Microbial Community Surveys. Bik H , editor. mSystems. 2016 Feb 23;1 (1 ):e00009–15. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00009-15 27822518
61 Parada AE , Needham DM , Fuhrman JA . Every base matters: assessing small subunit rRNA primers for marine microbiomes with mock communities, time series and global field samples. Environmental Microbiology. 2016 May;18 (5 ):1403–14.26271760
62 Sperling JL , Silva-Brandão KL , Brandão MM , Lloyd VK , Dang S , Davis CS , et al . Comparison of bacterial 16S rRNA variable regions for microbiome surveys of ticks. Ticks and Tick-borne Diseases. 2017 Jun;8 (4 ):453–61. doi: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2017.02.002 28236572
63 Parada AE , Fuhrman JA . Marine archaeal dynamics and interactions with the microbial community over 5 years from surface to seafloor. ISME J. 2017 Nov;11 (11 ):2510–25. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2017.104 28731479
64 Yeh Y , McNichol J , Needham DM , Fichot EB , Berdjeb L , Fuhrman JA . Comprehensive single-PCR 16S and 18S rRNA community analysis validated with mock communities, and estimation of sequencing bias against 18S. Environmental Microbiology. 2021 Jun;23 (6 ):3240–50. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.15553 33938123
65 Fadeev E , Cardozo-Mino MG , Rapp JZ , Bienhold C , Salter I , Salman-Carvalho V , et al . Comparison of Two 16S rRNA Primers (V3–V4 and V4–V5) for Studies of Arctic Microbial Communities. Front Microbiol. 2021 Feb 16;12 :637526. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.637526 33664723
66 Barak N , Fadeev E , Brekhman V , Aharonovich D , Lotan T , Sher D . Selecting 16S rRNA Primers for Microbiome Analysis in a Host—Microbe System: The Case of the Jellyfish Rhopilema nomadica. Microorganisms. 2023 Apr 6;11 (4 ):955. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms11040955 37110378
67 Callahan BJ , McMurdie PJ , Rosen MJ , Han AW , Johnson AJA , Holmes SP . DADA2: high-resolution sample inference from Illumina amplicon data. Nat Methods. 2016 Jul;13 (7 ):581–3. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3869 27214047
68 R Core Team. R: a language and environment for statistical computing [Internet]. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Computing; 2021. https://www.R-project.org/
69 RStudio Team. RStudio: integrated development for R [Internet]. Boston, MA: RStudio, PBC; 2020. http://www.rstudio.com/
70 Dacey DP , Chain FJJ . Concatenation of paired-end reads improves taxonomic classification of amplicons for profiling microbial communities. BMC Bioinformatics. 2021 Dec;22 (1 ):493. doi: 10.1186/s12859-021-04410-2 34641782
71 Edgar RC . Accuracy of microbial community diversity estimated by closed- and open-reference OTUs. PeerJ. 2017 Oct 4;5 :e3889. doi: 10.7717/peerj.3889 29018622
72 Nearing JT , Douglas GM , Comeau AM , Langille MGI . Denoising the Denoisers: an independent evaluation of microbiome sequence error-correction approaches. PeerJ. 2018 Aug 8;6 :e5364. doi: 10.7717/peerj.5364 30123705
73 Caporaso JG , Lauber CL , Walters WA , Berg-Lyons D , Lozupone CA , Turnbaugh PJ , et al . Global patterns of 16S rRNA diversity at a depth of millions of sequences per sample. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011 Mar 15;108 (supplement_1 ):4516–22.20534432
74 Werner JJ , Zhou D , Caporaso JG , Knight R , Angenent LT . Comparison of Illumina paired-end and single-direction sequencing for microbial 16S rRNA gene amplicon surveys. ISME J. 2012 Jul;6 (7 ):1273–6. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2011.186 22170427
75 Muturi EJ , Bara JJ , Rooney AP , Hansen AK . Midgut fungal and bacterial microbiota of Aedes triseriatus and Aedes japonicus shift in response to La Crosse virus infection. Mol Ecol. 2016 Aug;25 (16 ):4075–90.27357374
76 Sharma P , Rani J , Chauhan C , Kumari S , Tevatiya S , Das De T , et al . Altered Gut Microbiota and Immunity Defines Plasmodium vivax Survival in Anopheles stephensi. Front Immunol. 2020 May 14;11 :609.32477320
77 Virtanen S , Kalliala I , Nieminen P , Salonen A . Comparative analysis of vaginal microbiota sampling using 16S rRNA gene analysis. Fredricks DN , editor. PLoS ONE. 2017 Jul 19;12 (7 ):e0181477. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181477 28723942
78 McMurdie PJ , Holmes S . phyloseq: An R Package for Reproducible Interactive Analysis and Graphics of Microbiome Census Data. Watson M , editor. PLoS ONE. 2013 Apr 22;8 (4 ):e61217. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061217 23630581
79 Davis NM , Proctor DM , Holmes SP , Relman DA , Callahan BJ . Simple statistical identification and removal of contaminant sequences in marker-gene and metagenomics data. Microbiome. 2018 Dec;6 (1 ):226. doi: 10.1186/s40168-018-0605-2 30558668
80 Daly A , Baetens J , De Baets B . Ecological Diversity: Measuring the Unmeasurable. Mathematics. 2018 Jul 10;6 (7 ):119.
81 Hill TCJ , Walsh KA , Harris JA , Moffett BF . Using ecological diversity measures with bacterial communities. FEMS Microbiology Ecology. 2003 Feb;43 (1 ):1–11. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2003.tb01040.x 19719691
82 Pinto AJ , Raskin L . PCR Biases Distort Bacterial and Archaeal Community Structure in Pyrosequencing Datasets. Bertilsson S , editor. PLoS ONE. 2012 Aug 15;7 (8 ):e43093. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043093 22905208
83 Kassambara A. ggpubr: ggplot2 based publication ready plots [Internet]. 2020. https://rpkgs.datanovia.com/ggpubr/
84 Wickham H. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. 2nd ed. 2016. Cham: Springer International Publishing: Imprint: Springer; 2016. 1 p. (Use R!).
85 Oksanen J, Blanchet FG, Friendly M, Kindt R, Legendre P, McGlinn D, et al. vegan: community ecology package [Internet]. 2020. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=vegan
86 Ricotta C , Podani J . On some properties of the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity and their ecological meaning. Ecological Complexity. 2017 Sep;31 :201–5.
87 Legendre L , Legendre P . Numerical ecology. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2012.
88 Anderson MJ , Crist TO , Chase JM , Vellend M , Inouye BD , Freestone AL , et al . Navigating the multiple meanings of β diversity: a roadmap for the practicing ecologist: Roadmap for beta diversity. Ecology Letters. 2011 Jan;14 (1 ):19–28.21070562
89 Legendre P , Gallagher ED . Ecologically meaningful transformations for ordination of species data. Oecologia. 2001 Oct;129 (2 ):271–80. doi: 10.1007/s004420100716 28547606
90 Ramette A. Multivariate analyses in microbial ecology. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2007 Nov;62 (2 ):142–60. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2007.00375.x 17892477
91 Anderson MJ . Permutational Multivariate Analysis of Variance (PERMANOVA). In: Balakrishnan N , Colton T , Everitt B , Piegorsch W , Ruggeri F , Teugels JL , editors. Wiley StatsRef: Statistics Reference Online [Internet]. 1st ed. Wiley; 2017 [cited 2023 Mar 17]. p. 1–15. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781118445112.stat07841
92 Martinez Arbizu P. PairwiseAdonis: multilevel comparison using adonis.R package version 0.4. [Internet]. https://github.com/pmartinezarbizu/pairwiseAdonis
93 De Cáceres M , Legendre P . Associations between species and groups of sites: indices and statistical inference. Ecology. 2009;90 (12 ):3566–74. doi: 10.1890/08-1823.1 20120823
94 Sturges HA . The Choice of a Class Interval. Journal of the American Statistical Association. 1926 Mar;21 (153 ):65–6.
95 Legendre P , Fortin MJ . Spatial pattern and ecological analysis. Vegetatio. 1989 Jun;80 (2 ):107–38.
96 Liu C , Cui Y , Li X , Yao M . microeco: an R package for data mining in microbial community ecology. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2021 Jan 26;97 (2 ):fiaa255. doi: 10.1093/femsec/fiaa255 33332530
97 Stegen JC , Lin X , Fredrickson JK , Chen X , Kennedy DW , Murray CJ , et al . Quantifying community assembly processes and identifying features that impose them. ISME J. 2013 Nov;7 (11 ):2069–79. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2013.93 23739053
98 Stegen JC , Lin X , Fredrickson JK , Konopka AE . Estimating and mapping ecological processes influencing microbial community assembly. Front Microbiol [Internet]. 2015 May 1 [cited 2023 Feb 7];6 . Available from: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fmicb.2015.00370 25983725
99 Vellend M. Conceptual Synthesis in Community Ecology. The Quarterly Review of Biology. 2010 Jun;85 (2 ):183–206. doi: 10.1086/652373 20565040
100 Doyle CK , Labruna MB , Breitschwerdt EB , Tang YW , Corstvet RE , Hegarty BC , et al . Detection of Medically Important Ehrlichia by Quantitative Multicolor TaqMan Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction of the dsb Gene. The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics. 2005 Oct;7 (4 ):504–10. doi: 10.1016/S1525-1578(10)60581-8 16237220
101 Drazenovich N , Foley J , Brown RN . Use of Real-Time Quantitative PCR Targeting the msp2 Protein Gene to Identify Cryptic Anaplasma phagocytophilum Infections in Wildlife and Domestic Animals. Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases. 2006 Mar;6 (1 ):83–90.16584330
102 Kato CY , Chung IH , Robinson LK , Austin AL , Dasch GA , Massung RF . Assessment of Real-Time PCR Assay for Detection of Rickettsia spp. and Rickettsia rickettsii in Banked Clinical Samples. J Clin Microbiol. 2013 Jan;51 (1 ):314–7.23135935
103 Jasinskas A , Zhong J , Barbour AG . Highly Prevalent Coxiella sp. Bacterium in the Tick Vector Amblyomma americanum. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2007 Jan;73 (1 ):334–6.17085709
104 Clay K , Klyachko O , Grindle N , Civitello D , Oleske D , Fuqua C . Microbial communities and interactions in the lone star tick, Amblyomma americanum. Molecular Ecology. 2008 Oct;17 (19 ):4371–81.19378409
105 Ponnusamy L , Gonzalez A , Van Treuren W , Weiss S , Parobek CM , Juliano JJ , et al . Diversity of Rickettsiales in the Microbiome of the Lone Star Tick, Amblyomma americanum. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 Jan;80 (1 ):354–9.24162580
106 Gligorijević V , Pržulj N . Methods for biological data integration: perspectives and challenges. J R Soc Interface. 2015 Nov;12 (112 ):20150571. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2015.0571 26490630
107 Clay K , Fuqua . The tick microbiome: diversity, distribution and influence of the internal microbial community for a blood-feeding disease vector. Washington, DC.: National Academies Press.; 2010 p. A193–214. (National Research Council, Critical needs and gaps in understanding prevention, amelioration and resolution of Lyme and other tick-borne diseases: the short-term and long-term outcomes: workshopreport.).
108 Menchaca AC , Visi DK , Strey OF , Teel PD , Kalinowski K , Allen MS , et al . Preliminary assessment of microbiome changes following blood-feeding and survivorship in the Amblyomma americanum nymph-to-adult transition using semiconductor sequencing. PLoS ONE. 2013;8 (6 ):e67129.23826210
109 Williams-Newkirk AJ , Rowe LA , Mixson-Hayden TR , Dasch GA . Characterization of the Bacterial Communities of Life Stages of Free Living Lone Star Ticks (Amblyomma americanum). Munderloh UG , editor. PLoS ONE. 2014 Jul 23;9 (7 ):e102130.25054227
110 Brinkerhoff RJ , Clark C , Ocasio K , Gauthier DT , Hynes WL . Factors affecting the microbiome of Ixodes scapularis and Amblyomma americanum. PLoS ONE. 2020;15 (5 ):e0232398.32413031
111 Maldonado-Ruiz LP , Neupane S , Park Y , Zurek L . The bacterial community of the lone star tick (Amblyomma americanum). Parasites Vectors. 2021 Dec;14 (1 ):49.33446262
112 Binetruy F , Dupraz M , Buysse M , Duron O . Surface sterilization methods impact measures of internal microbial diversity in ticks. Parasites Vectors. 2019 Dec;12 (1 ):268. doi: 10.1186/s13071-019-3517-5 31138324
113 Elias L , Blazier JC , Rogovska YV , Konganti K , Wang J , Liu S , et al . Extensive sex-specific and regional variations observed in the microbiome of Dermacentor reticulatus. Ticks and Tick-borne Diseases. 2021 Sep;12 (5 ):101767.34130148
114 Duncan KT , Elshahed MS , Sundstrom KD , Little SE , Youssef NH . Influence of tick sex and geographic region on the microbiome of Dermacentor variabilis collected from dogs and cats across the United States. Ticks and Tick-borne Diseases. 2022 Sep;13 (5 ):102002.35810549
115 Duron O , Noël V , McCoy KD , Bonazzi M , Sidi-Boumedine K , Morel O , et al . The Recent Evolution of a Maternally-Inherited Endosymbiont of Ticks Led to the Emergence of the Q Fever Pathogen, Coxiella burnetii. Rasgon JL , editor. PLoS Pathog. 2015 May 15;11 (5 ):e1004892. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004892 25978383
116 Telford SR . Status of the “East Side Hypothesis” (Transovarial Interference) 25 Years Later. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 2009 May;1166 (1 ):144–50. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04522.x 19538274
117 Jia N , Wang J , Shi W , Du L , Sun Y , Zhan W , et al . Large-Scale Comparative Analyses of Tick Genomes Elucidate Their Genetic Diversity and Vector Capacities. Cell. 2020 Sep;182 (5 ):1328–1340.e13. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.07.023 32814014
118 Kumar D , Downs LP , Adegoke A , Machtinger E , Oggenfuss K , Ostfeld RS , et al . An Exploratory Study on the Microbiome of Northern and Southern Populations of Ixodes scapularis Ticks Predicts Changes and Unique Bacterial Interactions. Pathogens. 2022 Jan 21;11 (2 ):130.35215074
119 Lejal E , Chiquet J , Aubert J , Robin S , Estrada-Peña A , Rue O , et al . Temporal patterns in Ixodes ricinus microbial communities: an insight into tick-borne microbe interactions. Microbiome. 2021 Jul 3;9 (1 ):153.34217365
120 Schreiter S , Ding GC , Heuer H , Neumann G , Sandmann M , Grosch R , et al . Effect of the soil type on the microbiome in the rhizosphere of field-grown lettuce. Front Microbiol [Internet]. 2014 Apr 8 [cited 2023 Feb 1];5 . Available from: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fmicb.2014.00144/abstract
121 Swei A , Kwan JY . Tick microbiome and pathogen acquisition altered by host blood meal. ISME J. 2017 Mar;11 (3 ):813–6. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2016.152 27858931
122 Landesman WJ , Mulder K , Allan BF , Bashor LA , Keesing F , LoGiudice K , et al . Potential effects of blood meal host on bacterial community composition in Ixodes scapularis nymphs. Ticks and Tick-borne Diseases. 2019 Apr;10 (3 ):523–7. doi: 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2019.01.002 30660375
123 Risely A , Waite DW , Ujvari B , Hoye BJ , Klaassen M . Active migration is associated with specific and consistent changes to gut microbiota in Calidris shorebirds. Wilson K, editor. J Anim Ecol. 2018 Mar;87 (2 ):428–37.29111601
124 Turjeman S , Corl A , Wolfenden A , Tsalyuk M , Lublin A , Choi O , et al . Migration, pathogens and the avian microbiome: A comparative study in sympatric migrants and residents. Mol Ecol. 2020 Dec;29 (23 ):4706–20. doi: 10.1111/mec.15660 33001530
125 Mueller UG , Mikheyev AS , Hong E , Sen R , Warren DL , Solomon SE , et al . Evolution of cold-tolerant fungal symbionts permits winter fungiculture by leafcutter ants at the northern frontier of a tropical ant—fungus symbiosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011 Mar 8;108 (10 ):4053–6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1015806108 21368106
126 Kagemann J , Clay K . Effects of infection by Arsenophonus and Rickettsia bacteria on the locomotive ability of the ticks Amblyomma americanum, Dermacentor variabilis, and Ixodes scapularis. J Med Entomol. 2013 Jan;50 (1 ):155–62.23427665
127 Lozupone C , Knight R . UniFrac: a New Phylogenetic Method for Comparing Microbial Communities. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005 Dec;71 (12 ):8228–35. doi: 10.1128/AEM.71.12.8228-8235.2005 16332807
128 Hubbell SP . The Unified Neutral Theory of Biodiversity and Biogeography. [Internet]. Princeton, NJ.: Princeton University Press; 2001 [cited 2023 Feb 2]. https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/9781400837526/html
129 Lowe WH , McPeek MA . Is dispersal neutral? Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 2014 Aug;29 (8 ):444–50. doi: 10.1016/j.tree.2014.05.009 24962790
130 Mixson TR , Campbell SR , Gill JS , Ginsberg HS , Reichard MV , Schulze TL , et al . Prevalence of Ehrlichia, Borrelia, and Rickettsial Agents in Amblyomma americanum (Acari: Ixodidae) Collected from Nine States. me. 2006 Nov 1;43 (6 ):1261–8.
